SEN.
TIM KAINE (D-VA), Vice
Presidential Candidate: Do you
believe in a stronger together
America,
or do you believe that
we're a crippled America?
GOV.
MIKE PENCE (R-IN), Vice
Presidential Candidate: With the
strong leadership that Donald
Trump
will bring to the White House,
we're very confident that we can
bring real change.
SEN.
TIM KAINE: Things work better
when we work as a team.
That's what Hillary
Clinton believes.
GOV.
MIKE PENCE: And when we elect
Donald Trump, they will have a
team and a partner in the
White House to march back up to
a stronger and greater America.
GWEN IFILL: Good evening.
I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Welcome to this "PBS NewsHour"
special, coverage of the one
vice presidential debate between
Republican Mike Pence
and Democrat Tim Kaine.
The stage is set at Longwood
University in Farmville,
Virginia.
While the level of anticipation
pales in comparison to last
week's showdown between Hillary
Clinton
and Donald Trump, there is
still a lot on the line, Gwen.
GWEN IFILL: There is, Judy.
It's a chance for these two men
to introduce themselves to the
nation, but, more important,
to bolster the top of
their respective tickets.
Elaine Quijano of CBS News and
their digital channel, CBSN,
will moderate.
And joining us at the table, our
regular contributors, syndicated
columnist Mark Shields, from The
Cook Political Report, Amy
Walter, and Washington Post
columnist Michael Gerson.
Welcome, all.
Here is the question
of the night.
Why does the vice
presidential debate matter?
Michael Gerson?
(LAUGHTER)
MICHAEL GERSON, The Washington
Post: Well, I think Republicans
actually need some good
news after a historic trouncing.
And so there's
morale issue here.
And they need a good night.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Amy Walter?
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: I absolutely agree.
They have the role of
playing stabilizer.
For Mike Pence, it is to get
Trump and the Trump campaign
back on track, to sort of
stabilize
after the big fall
of this past week.
And for Tim Kaine, it's to
stabilize Hillary Clinton's
lead.
She has the momentum.
She's looking strong right now.
But can he help her withstand
what I think, for Mike Pence, is
going to be a much more
focused and much more
policy-oriented critique of the
Clinton campaign?
GWEN IFILL: Mark, who are
the stakes higher for?
MARK SHIELDS: I think are
awfully, I think, obviously
higher for Pence and for Trump,
because he's trying
to stop the bleeding.
He's trying to right the ship
from listing, or whatever bad
metaphor you want to use,
or I want to use.
But, no, they have had a
terrible week, just a terrible
week, and much -- totally
self-inflicted.
And so it's to Mike Pence to
restore a sense of rationality,
of purpose, and to be a
character
witness.
I mean, this -- it's
fascinating, because Todd Purdum
in Politico called this the
battle
of the normals.
I mean, Mike -- Kaine and Mike
Pence are very normal people.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Michael
Gerson, that means that there's
some -- that people are going
to be watching to say, what is
going to make news tonight?
Just a couple of seconds.
MICHAEL GERSON: Well, they will
have -- these are normal people
that will have to discover
their inner attack dog.
This is the role of a vice
presidential candidate, to press
the case against the opposition.
Both of them need to do that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right.
And now we go to
Farmville, Virginia.
Here is Elaine
Quijano of CBS News.
She's the moderator
of tonight's debate.
She will introduce
the two candidates.
QUIJANO: Good evening.
From Longwood University in
Farmville, Virginia, and welcome
to the first, and only, vice
presidential
debate of 2016, sponsored by the
Commission on Presidential
Debates.
QUIJANO: I'm Elaine Quijano,
anchor at CBSN, and
correspondent for CBS News.
It's an honor to moderate this
debate between Senator Tim Kaine
and Governor Mike Pence.
Both are longtime public
servants who are also proud
fathers of sons serving in the
U.S. Marines.
The campaigns have agreed to the
rules of this 90-minute debate.
There will be nine different
segments covering domestic and
foreign policy issues.
Each segment will begin with a
question to both candidates who
will each have two minutes
to answer.
Then I'll ask follow-up
questions to facilitate a
discussion between the
candidates.
By coin toss, it's been
determined that Senator Kaine
will be first to answer the
opening
question.
QUIJANO: We have an
enthusiastic audience tonight.
They've agreed to only express
that enthusiasm once at the end
of the debate and right now
as we welcome Governor Mike
Pence and Senator Tim Kaine.
(APPLAUSE)
Gentlemen, welcome.
It truly is a privilege to
be with both of you tonight.
QUIJANO: I'd like to start with
the topic of presidential
leadership.
Twenty-eight years ago tomorrow
night, Lloyd Bentsen said the
vice presidential debate
was not about the qualifications
for the vice presidency, but
about how if tragedy should
occur, the vice president has to
step in without any margin for
error, without time for
preparation,
to take over the responsibility
for the biggest job in the
world.
What about your qualities, your
skills, and your temperament
equip you to step into that
role at a moment's notice?
Senator Kaine?
KAINE: Elaine, thank you for
being here tonight, and,
Governor Pence, welcome.
It is so great to be back at
Longwood University in
Farmville, Virginia.
This is a very special place.
Sixty-five years ago, a young,
courageous woman, Barbara Johns,
led a walkout of her
high school, Moton High School.
She made history by protesting
school segregation.
She believed our nation
was stronger together.
And that walkout led to the
Brown v. Board of Education
decision that moved us down the
path toward equality.
I am so proud to be running with
another strong, history-making
woman, Hillary Clinton, to
be president of the
United States.
I'm proud because her vision of
stronger together, building an
economy that works for all, not
just those at the top, being
safe in the world not only with
a strong military, but also
strong alliances to battle
terrorism and climate change,
and also to build a community of
respect,
just like Barbara Johns
tried to do 65 years ago.
That's why I'm so proud
to be her running mate.
Hillary told me why she asked
me to be her running mate.
She said the test of a Clinton
administration will not be the
signing of a bill or the passage
of a bill.
It'll be whether we can make
somebody's life better, whether
we can make a classroom better
learning environment for
schoolkids or teachers, whether
we can make a safer -- it's
going
to be about results.
And she said to me, you've been
a missionary and a civil rights
lawyer.
You've been a city
councilman and mayor.
You've been a lieutenant
governor and governor and now a
U.S. senator.
I think you will help me figure
out how to govern this nation so
that we always keep
in mind that the success of the
administration is the difference
we make in people's lives.
And that's what I bring to the
ticket, that experience having
served at all levels of
government.
But my primary role is to be
Hillary Clinton's right-hand
person and strong supporter as
she puts together the most
historic administration
possible.
And I relish that role.
I'm so proud of her.
KAINE: I'll just say this: We
trust Hillary Clinton, my wife
and I, and we trust her with
the most important
thing in our life.
We have a son deployed overseas
in the Marine Corps right now.
We trust Hillary Clinton as
president and
commander-in-chief, but the
thought of Donald
Trump as commander-in-chief
scares us to death.
QUIJANO: Governor Pence?
PENCE: Well, first off, thank
you, Elaine, and thank you to --
thank you to Norwood University
for their wonderful hospitality
and the Commission on
Presidential Debates.
It's deeply humbling for me to
be here, to be surrounded by my
-- my wonderful family.
And, Senator Kaine, it's an
honor to be here with you, as
well.
And I just -- I also want to say
-- I want to say thanks to
everyone that's looking in
tonight, who understands what an
enormously important time this
is in the life of our
nation.
For the last seven-and-a-half
years, we've seen America's
place in the world weakened.
We've seen an economy stifled by
more taxes, more regulation, a
war on coal, and a failing
health care reform come to be
known as Obamacare, and the
American people know that we
need
to make a change.
And so I want to thank all of
you for being -- being with us
tonight.
PENCE: I also want to thank
Donald Trump for making that
call and inviting us to be a
part
of this ticket.
I have to tell you, I'm a -- I'm
a small-town boy from a place
not too different from
Farmville.
I grew up with a cornfield
in my backyard.
My grandfather had immigrated to
this country when he was about
my son's age.
My mom and dad built a --
everything that matters in a
small town in Southern Indiana.
They built a family and -- and
a good name and a business.
And they raised a family.
And I dreamed some day of
representing my home town in
Washington, D.C., but I --
honestly,
Elaine, I never imagined --
never imagined I'd have the
opportunity to be governor of
the state that I love, let alone
be sitting at a table like this
in this kind of a position.
SEN. TIM KAINE (D-VA), Vice
Presidential Candidate: Do you
believe in a stronger together
America,
or do you believe that
we're a crippled America?
GOV. MIKE PENCE (R-IN), Vice
Presidential Candidate: With the
strong leadership that
Donald Trump will bring to the
White House, we're very
confident that we can bring real
change.
SEN. TIM KAINE: Things work
better when we work as a team.
That's what Hillary Clinton
believes.
GOV. MIKE PENCE: And when we
elect Donald Trump, they will
have a team and a partner
in the White House to march back
up to a stronger and greater
America.
GWEN IFILL: Good
evening. I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Welcome to this "PBS NewsHour"
special, coverage of the one
vice presidential debate between
Republican Mike Pence
and Democrat Tim Kaine.
The stage is set at Longwood
University in Farmville,
Virginia. While the level of
anticipation
pales in comparison to last
week's showdown between Hillary
Clinton and Donald Trump,
there is still a lot
on the line, Gwen.
GWEN IFILL: There is, Judy.
It's a chance for these two men
to introduce themselves to the
nation, but, more important,
to bolster the top of
their respective tickets.
Elaine Quijano of CBS News and
their digital channel, CBSN,
will moderate.
And joining us at the table, our
regular contributors, syndicated
columnist Mark Shields, from The
Cook Political Report, Amy
Walter, and Washington Post
columnist Michael Gerson.
Welcome, all.
Here is the question of the
night. Why does the vice
presidential debate matter?
Michael Gerson?
(LAUGHTER)
MICHAEL GERSON, The Washington
Post: Well, I think Republicans
actually need some good
news after a historic trouncing.
And so there's morale issue
here. And they need a good
night.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Amy Walter?
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: I absolutely agree.
They have the role of playing
stabilizer. For Mike Pence, it
is to get Trump and the
Trump campaign back on track, to
sort of stabilize after the big
fall of this past week.
And for Tim Kaine, it's to
stabilize Hillary Clinton's
lead. She has the momentum.
She's
looking strong right now. But
can he help her withstand what I
think, for Mike Pence,
is going to be a much more
focused and much more
policy-oriented critique of the
Clinton
campaign?
GWEN IFILL: Mark, who are
the stakes higher for?
MARK SHIELDS: I think are
awfully, I think, obviously
higher for Pence and for Trump,
because he's trying to stop the
bleeding. He's trying to right
the ship from listing,
or whatever bad metaphor you
want to use, or I want to use.
But, no, they have had a
terrible week, just a terrible
week, and much -- totally
self-inflicted.
And so it's to Mike Pence to
restore a sense of rationality,
of purpose, and to be a
character
witness.
I mean, this -- it's
fascinating, because Todd Purdum
in Politico called this the
battle
of the normals. I mean, Mike --
Kaine and Mike Pence are very
normal people.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Michael
Gerson, that means that there's
some -- that people are going
to be watching to say, what is
going to make news tonight? Just
a couple of seconds.
MICHAEL GERSON: Well, they will
have -- these are normal people
that will have to discover
their inner attack dog. This is
the role of a vice presidential
candidate, to press the
case against the opposition.
Both of them need to do that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right.
And now we go to
Farmville, Virginia.
Here is Elaine Quijano of CBS
News. She's the moderator of
tonight's debate. She will
introduce the two candidates.
QUIJANO: Good evening. From
Longwood University in
Farmville, Virginia, and welcome
to the
first, and only, vice
presidential debate of 2016,
sponsored by the Commission on
Presidential
Debates.
QUIJANO: I'm Elaine Quijano,
anchor at CBSN, and
correspondent for CBS News. It's
an honor
to moderate this debate between
Senator Tim Kaine and Governor
Mike Pence. Both are longtime
public servants who are also
proud fathers of sons serving in
the U.S. Marines.
The campaigns have agreed to the
rules of this 90-minute debate.
There will be nine
different segments covering
domestic and foreign policy
issues. Each segment will begin
with
a question to both candidates
who will each have two minutes
to answer. Then I'll ask
follow-up questions to
facilitate a discussion between
the candidates. By coin toss,
it's
been determined that Senator
Kaine will be first to answer
the opening question.
QUIJANO: We have an enthusiastic
audience tonight. They've agreed
to only express that
enthusiasm once at the end of
the debate and right now as we
welcome Governor Mike Pence
and Senator Tim Kaine.
(APPLAUSE)
Gentlemen, welcome. It truly is
a privilege to be with both of
you tonight.
QUIJANO: I'd like to start with
the topic of presidential
leadership. Twenty-eight years
ago tomorrow night, Lloyd
Bentsen said the vice
presidential debate was not
about the
qualifications for the vice
presidency, but about how if
tragedy should occur, the vice
president has to step in without
any margin for error, without
time for preparation, to
take over the responsibility for
the biggest job in the world.
What about your qualities, your
skills, and your temperament
equip you to step into that
role at a moment's
notice? Senator Kaine?
KAINE: Elaine, thank you for
being here tonight, and,
Governor Pence, welcome. It is
so great
to be back at Longwood
University in Farmville,
Virginia.
This is a very special place.
Sixty-five years ago, a young,
courageous woman, Barbara Johns,
led a walkout of her high
school, Moton High School. She
made history by protesting
school
segregation. She believed our
nation was stronger together.
And that walkout led to the
Brown
v. Board of Education decision
that moved us down the path
toward equality.
I am so proud to be running with
another strong, history-making
woman, Hillary Clinton, to
be president of the United
States. I'm proud because her
vision of stronger together,
building
an economy that works for all,
not just those at the top, being
safe in the world not only
with a strong military, but also
strong alliances to battle
terrorism and climate change,
and
also to build a community of
respect, just like Barbara Johns
tried to do 65 years ago.
That's why I'm so proud
to be her running mate.
Hillary told me why she asked me
to be her running mate. She said
the test of a Clinton
administration will not be the
signing of a bill or the passage
of a bill. It'll be
whether we can make somebody's
life better, whether we can make
a classroom better learning
environment for schoolkids or
teachers, whether we can make a
safer -- it's going to be about
results.
And she said to me, you've been
a missionary and a civil rights
lawyer. You've been a city
councilman and mayor. You've
been a lieutenant governor and
governor and now a U.S. senator.
I think you will help me figure
out how to govern this nation so
that we always keep
in mind that the success of the
administration is the difference
we make in people's lives.
And that's what I bring to the
ticket, that experience having
served at all levels of
government. But my primary role
is to be Hillary Clinton's
right-hand person and strong
supporter
as she puts together the most
historic administration
possible. And I relish that
role. I'm so proud
of her.
KAINE: I'll just say this: We
trust Hillary Clinton, my wife
and I, and we trust her with
the most important thing in our
life. We have a son deployed
overseas in the Marine Corps
right now. We trust Hillary
Clinton as president and
commander-in-chief, but the
thought of
Donald Trump as
commander-in-chief scares us to
death.
QUIJANO: Governor Pence?
PENCE: Well, first off, thank
you, Elaine, and thank you to --
thank you to Norwood University
for their wonderful hospitality
and the Commission on
Presidential Debates. It's
deeply humbling
for me to be here, to be
surrounded by my -- my wonderful
family.
And, Senator Kaine, it's an
honor to be here with you, as
well. And I just -- I also want
to say -- I want to say thanks
to everyone that's looking in
tonight, who understands
what an enormously important
time this is in the life of our
nation.
For the last seven-and-a-half
years, we've seen America's
place in the world weakened.
We've seen an economy stifled by
more taxes, more regulation, a
war on coal, and a failing
health care reform come to be
known as Obamacare, and the
American people know that we
need
to make a change. And so I want
to thank all of you for being --
being with us tonight.
PENCE: I also want to thank
Donald Trump for making that
call and inviting us to be a
part
of this ticket. I have to tell
you, I'm a -- I'm a small-town
boy from a place not too
different from Farmville. I grew
up with a cornfield in my
backyard. My grandfather had
immigrated to this country when
he was about my son's age. My
mom and dad built a --
everything
that matters in a small town in
Southern Indiana. They built a
family and -- and a good name
and a business. And they raised
a family. And I dreamed some day
of representing my
home town in Washington, D.C.,
but I -- honestly, Elaine, I
never imagined -- never imagined
I'd have the opportunity to be
governor of the state that I
love, let alone be sitting
at a table like this in
this kind of a position.
So to answer your question, I
would say I -- I would hope that
if -- if the responsibility
ever fell to me in this role,
that I would meet it with the
way that I'm going to meet
the responsibility should I be
elected vice president of the
United States. And that's
to bring a lifetime of
experience, a lifetime growing
up in a small town, a lifetime
where
I've served in the Congress of
the United States, where --
where I've led a state that
works in the great state of
Indiana, and whatever other
responsibilities might follow
from this,
I -- I would hope and, frankly,
I would pray to be able to meet
that moment with that -- that
lifetime of experience.
QUIJANO: Senator Kaine, on the
campaign trail, you praised
Secretary Clinton's character,
including her commitment to
public service, yet 60 percent
of voters don't think she's
trustworthy. Why do so many
people distrust her? Is it
because they have questions
about
her e-mails and the
Clinton Foundation?
KAINE: Elaine, let me tell you
why I trust Hillary Clinton.
Here's what people should
look at as they look at a public
servant. Do they have a passion
in their life that
showed up before they were in
public life? And have they held
onto that passion throughout
their life, regardless of
whether they were in office or
not, succeeding or failing?
Hillary Clinton has that
passion. From a time as a kid in
a Methodist youth group in the
suburbs of Chicago, she has been
focused on serving others with a
special focus on empowering
families and kids. As a civil
rights lawyer in the South, with
the Children's Defense
Fund, first lady of Arkansas and
this country, senator, secretary
of state, it's always been
about putting others first. And
that's a sharp contrast with
Donald Trump.
Donald Trump always puts himself
first. He built a business
career, in the words of one
of his own campaign staffers,
"off the backs of the little
guy." And as a candidate, he
started his campaign with a
speech where he called Mexicans
rapists and criminals, and
he has pursued the discredited
and really outrageous lie that
President Obama wasn't
born in the United States.
It is so painful to suggest that
we go back to think about these
days where an African-American
could not be a citizen of the
United States. And I can't
imagine how Governor Pence can
defend the insult- driven
selfish "me first" style of
Donald Trump.
QUIJANO: Governor Pence, let me
ask you, you have said Donald
Trump is, quote, "thoughtful,
compassionate, and steady." Yet
67 percent of voters feel he is
a risky choice, and 65
percent feel he does not have
the right kind of temperament to
be president. Why do so
many Americans think Mr.
Trump is simply too erratic?
PENCE: Well, let me -- let me
say first and foremost that,
Senator, you and Hillary Clinton
would know a lot about an
insult- driven campaign. It
really is remarkable. At a time
when literally,
in the wake of Hillary Clinton's
tenure as secretary of state,
where she was the architect
of the Obama administration's
foreign policy, we see entire
portions of the world,
particularly
the wider Middle East, literally
spinning out of control. I mean,
the situation we're
watching hour by hour in Syria
today is the result of the
failed foreign policy and the
weak foreign policy that Hillary
Clinton helped lead in this
administration and create. The
newly emboldened -- the
aggression of Russia, whether it
was in Ukraine or now they're
heavy-handed
approach...
KAINE: You guys love Russia.
You both have said...
PENCE: ... their
heavy-handed approach.
KAINE: You both have said -- you
both have said Vladimir Putin is
a better leader than
the president.
PENCE: Well...
(CROSSTALK)
QUIJANO: Well, we're going to
get to Russia in just a moment.
But I do want to get back
to the question at...
PENCE: But in the midst --
Elaine, thank you. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator, I'll...
KAINE: These guys have praised
Vladimir Putin as a great
leader. How can that...
(CROSSTALK)
QUIJANO: Yes, and we will get to
that, Senator. We do have that
coming up here. But in the
meantime, the questions...
PENCE: Well, Senator,
I must have hit a...
(CROSSTALK)
PENCE: I must have
hit a nerve here.
QUIJANO: Why the disconnect?
PENCE: Because at a time of
great challenge in the life of
this nation, where we've
weakened
America's place in the world,
stifled America's economy, the
campaign of Hillary Clinton and
Tim Kaine has been an
avalanche of insults.
Look, to get to your question
about trustworthiness, Donald
Trump has built a business
through
hard times and through good
times. He's brought an
extraordinary business acumen.
He's employed
tens of thousands of
people in this country.
KAINE: And paid few taxes
and lost a billion a year.
(CROSSTALK)
QUIJANO: And why the disconnect
with your running mate?
PENCE: But there's a -- there's
a reason why people question the
trustworthiness of Hillary
Clinton. And that's because
they're paying attention. I
mean, the reality is, when she
was secretary of state, Senator,
come on. She had a Clinton
Foundation accepting
contributions
from foreign governments.
KAINE: You are Donald Trump's
apprentice. Let me talk about
this...
(CROSSTALK)
PENCE: Senator, I think
I'm still on my time.
KAINE: Well, I think --
isn't this a discussion?
QUIJANO: This is our
open discussion.
KAINE: Yeah, let's talk
about the state of...
(CROSSTALK)
PENCE: Well, let me interrupt --
let me interrupt you and finish
my sentence, if I can.
KAINE: Finish your sentence.
PENCE: The Clinton Foundation
accepted foreign contributions
from foreign governments and
foreign donors while she
was secretary of state.
KAINE: OK, now I can
weigh in. Now...
PENCE: She had a
private server...
KAINE: Now, I get to weigh in.
Now, let me just say this...
PENCE: ... that
was discovered...
(CROSSTALK)
QUIJANO: ... Senator, you have
an opportunity to respond.
PENCE: ... keep that pay to play
process out of the reach of the
public.
KAINE: Governor Pence --
Governor Pence doesn't think the
world's going so well and he,
you
know, is going to say
it's everybody's fault.
PENCE: Do you?
KAINE: Let me tell you this.
When Hillary Clinton became
secretary of state, Governor
Pence, did you know that
Osama bin Laden was alive?
PENCE: Yes.
KAINE: Do you know that we had
175,000 troops deployed in the
battlefield in Iraq and
Afghanistan?
Do you know that Iran was racing
toward a nuclear weapon and
Russia was expanding its
stockpile?
Under Secretary Clinton's
leadership, she was part of the
national team, public safety
team that went after and revived
the dormant hunt against bin
Laden and wiped him off the
face of the Earth. She worked to
deal with the Russians to reduce
their chemical weapons
stockpile. She worked a tough
negotiation with nations around
the world to eliminate
the Iranian nuclear weapons
program without firing a shot.
PENCE: Eliminate the Iranian
nuclear weapons program?
KAINE: Absolutely, without
firing a shot. And instead of
175,000 American troops deployed
overseas, we now have 15,000.
PENCE: Right and...
KAINE: These are very,
very good things.
PENCE: And Iraq has been overrun
by ISIS, because Hillary Clinton
failed to renegotiate...
KAINE: Well, if you want to put
more American troops in Iraq,
you can propose that.
PENCE: Hillary Clinton --
Hillary Clinton -- Hillary
Clinton failed to renegotiate a
status of forces agreement...
KAINE: No, that is
incorrect. That's incorrect.
PENCE: And so we removed --
we removed all of our...
QUIJANO: Gentlemen,
we'll get to...
(CROSSTALK)
PENCE: ... troops from Iraq, and
ISIS was able to be conjured up
in that vacuum.
KAINE: But I'd
like to correct...
PENCE: ... and overrun
vast areas of Iraq.
KAINE: Governor, President Bush
said we would leave Iraq at the
end of 2011. And, Elaine,
Iraq didn't want our troops to
stay, and they wouldn't give us
the protection for our troops.
And guess what? If a nation
where our troops are serving
does not want us to stay, we're
not going to stay without
their protection.
PENCE: It was a failure of
the secretary of state...
QUIJANO: We need to move on
to the next topic, gentlemen.
KAINE: If Governor Pence wants
to put more troops back in Iraq,
that's...
QUIJANO: There are a lot of
people wondering in this country
about the economy. Let's turn
to the issue of the economy.
KAINE: OK.
QUIJANO: According to the
nonpartisan Committee for a
Responsible Federal Budget,
neither
of your economic plans will
reduce the growing $19 trillion
gross national debt. In fact,
your plans would add
even more to it.
Both of you were governors who
balanced state budgets. Are you
concerned that adding more
to the debt could be disastrous
for the country. Governor Pence?
PENCE: I think the fact that --
that under this past
administration was of which
Hillary
Clinton was a part, we've almost
doubled the national debt is
atrocious. I mean, I'm very
proud of the fact that -- I come
from a state that works. The
state of Indiana has balanced
budgets. We cut taxes, we've
made record investments in
education and in infrastructure,
and I
still finish my term with
$2 billion in the bank.
That's a little bit different
than when Senator Kaine was
governor here in Virginia. He
actually
-- he actually tried to raise
taxes by about $4 billion. He
left his state about $2 billion
in the hole. In the state of
Indiana, we've cut unemployment
in half; unemployment doubled
when he was governor.
PENCE: But I think he's a very
fitting running mate for Hillary
Clinton, because in the wake
of a season where American
families are struggling in this
economy under the weight of
higher
taxes and Obamacare and the war
on coal and the stifling
avalanche of regulation coming
out of this administration,
Hillary Clinton and Tim Kaine
want more of the same. It really
is remarkable that they actually
are advocating a trillion
dollars in tax increases, which
I get that. You tried to raise
taxes here in Virginia and were
unsuccessful.
But a trillion dollars in tax
increases, more regulation, more
of the same war on coal,
and more of Obamacare that now
even former President Bill
Clinton calls Obamacare a crazy
plan. But Hillary Clinton and
Tim Kaine want to build on
Obamacare. They want to expand
it into a single-payer program.
And for all the world, Hillary
Clinton just thinks Obamacare
is a good start.
Look, Donald Trump and I have a
plan to get this economy moving
again just the way that
it worked in the 1980s, just the
way it worked in the 1960s, and
that is by lowering taxes
across the board for working
families, small businesses and
family farms, ending the war
on coal that is hurting jobs and
hurting this economy even here
in Virginia, repealing Obamacare
lock, stock, and barrel, and
repealing all of the executive
orders that Barack Obama
has signed that are stifling
economic growth in this economy.
We can get America moving again.
Put on top of that the kind of
trade deals that'll put
the American worker first, and
you've got a prescription for
real growth. And when you
get the economy growing, Elaine,
that's when you can deal with
the national debt. When
we get back to 3.5 percent to 4
percent growth with Donald
Trump's plan will do, then we're
going to have the resources to
meet our nation's needs at home
and abroad, and we're going
to have the ability to bring
down the national debt.
QUIJANO: Senator Kaine?
KAINE: Elaine, on the economy,
there's a fundamental choice for
the American electorate. Do you
want a "you're hired" president
in Hillary Clinton or do you
want a "you're fired" president
in Donald Trump? I think
that's not such a hard choice.
Hillary and I have a plan that's
on the table that's a "you're
hired" plan. Five components.
First thing we do is we invest
in manufacturing,
infrastructure, and research in
the clean
energy jobs of tomorrow. Second
thing is we invest in our
workforce, from pre-K education
to great teachers to debt-free
college and tuition-free college
for families that make
less than $125,000 a year.
Third, we promote fairness by
raising the minimum wage, so you
can't work full-time
and be under the poverty level,
and by paying women equal pay
for equal work.
Fourth, we promote small
business growth, just as we've
done in Virginia, to make it
easier to start and grow small
businesses. Hillary and I each
grew up in small-business
families. My dad, who ran an
iron working and welding shop,
is here tonight.
And, fifth, we have a tax plan
that targets tax relief to
middle- class individuals and
small businesses and asks those
at the very top who've benefited
as we've come out of
recession to pay more.
KAINE: The Trump plan is a
different plan. It's a "you're
fired" plan. And there's two
key elements to it. First,
Donald Trump said wages are too
high. And both Donald Trump
and Mike Pence think we ought to
eliminate the federal minimum
wage.
Mike Pence, when he was in
Congress, voted against raising
the minimum wage above $5.15.
And he has been a one-man
bulwark against minimum wage
increases in Indiana.
The second component of the plan
is massive tax breaks for the
very top, trillions of
dollars of tax breaks for people
just like Donald Trump. The
problem with this, Elaine,
is that's exactly what we did 10
years ago and it put the economy
into the deepest recession
-- the deepest recession
since the 1930s.
Independent analysts say the
Clinton plan would grow the
economy by 10.5 million jobs.
The Trump plan would cost 3.5
million jobs. And Donald Trump
-- why would he do this?
Because his tax plan basically
helps him. And if he ever met
his promise and he gave
his tax returns to the American
public like he said he would, we
would see just how much
his economic plan is
really a Trump-first plan.
QUIJANO: On that point, Governor
Pence, recently the New York
Times released part of Mr.
Trump's
1995 tax return and reported
that he could have avoided
paying federal income taxes for
years. Yesterday, Mr. Trump said
he brilliantly used the laws to
pay as little tax as legally
possible. Does that
seem fair to you?
PENCE: Well, first, let me say,
I appreciated the "you're
hired," "you're fired" thing,
Senator. You use that a whole
lot. And I think your running
mate used a lot of pre-done
lines.
Look, what -- what you all just
heard out there is more taxes,
$2 trillion in more spending,
more deficits, more debt, more
government. And if you think
that's all working, then
you look at the other side of
the table. I mean, the truth of
the matter is, the policies
of this administration, which
Hillary Clinton and Senator
Kaine want to continue, have run
this economy into a
ditch. We're in the...
KAINE: Fifteen million new jobs?
PENCE: ... slowest economic
recovery since the Great
Depression.
KAINE: Fifteen million new jobs?
QUIJANO: Governor... (CROSSTALK)
PENCE: There are millions more
people living in poverty today
than the day that Barack
Obama with Hillary
Clinton at his side...
KAINE: And the poverty level
and the median income...
PENCE: ... stepped
into the Oval Office.
KAINE: ... improved dramatically
between 2014 and 2015.
PENCE: You -- honestly, Senator,
you can roll out the numbers and
the sunny side, but I
got to tell you, people in
Scranton know different. People
in Fort Wayne, Indiana, know
different.
I mean, this economy is
struggling. The answer to this
economy is not more taxes.
KAINE: But it's not the giveaway
tax relief to the folks at the
top.
PENCE: It's not more spending...
(CROSSTALK)
KAINE: I am interested to hear
whether he'll defend his running
mate's not releasing taxes
and not paying taxes.
PENCE: Absolutely I will.
QUIJANO: Governor, with all due
respect, the question was about
whether it seems fair to
you that Mr. Trump said he
brilliantly used the laws to pay
as little tax as legally
possible.
PENCE: Well, this is probably
the difference between Donald
Trump and Hillary Clinton and
Senator Kaine. And, I mean,
Hillary Clinton and Senator
Kaine -- God bless you for it,
career public servants, that's
great -- Donald Trump is a
businessman, not a career
politician.
He actually built a business.
Those tax returns that were --
that came out publicly this week
show that he faced some
pretty tough times 20 years ago.
But like virtually every other
business, including
the New York Times not too long
ago, he used what's called net
operating loss. We have
a tax code, Senator, that
actually is designed to
encourage entrepreneurship in
this country.
KAINE: But why won't he
release his tax returns?
PENCE: Well, we're answering the
question about -- about a
business thing, is he...
KAINE: I do want to come
back to that, but...
PENCE: His tax returns -- his
tax returns showed he went
through a very difficult time,
but he used the tax code just
the way it's supposed to be
used. And he did it brilliantly.
KAINE: How do you know that? You
haven't seen his tax returns.
PENCE: He created a runway --
because he's created a business
that's worth billions of
dollars today.
KAINE: How do you know that?
PENCE: And with regard to paying
taxes, this whole riff about not
paying taxes and people
saying he didn't pay taxes for
years, Donald Trump has created
tens of thousands of jobs.
And he's paid payroll taxes,
sales taxes, property taxes...
KAINE: Elaine, let me
talk about something.
QUIJANO: Senator, I'm going to
give you about 30 seconds to
respond, and I have question
on Social Security for you.
KAINE: OK.
PENCE: The only issue on taxes
Clinton is going to raise taxes,
and Donald
Trump and I are
going to cut them.
KAINE: Donald Trump started this
campaign in 2014 and he said,
"If I run for president,
I will absolutely release my
taxes." He's broken his first...
PENCE: And he will.
KAINE: He's broken his first
promise. Second, he stood on the
stage...
PENCE: He hasn't broken his
promise. He said he's...
KAINE: He stood on the stage
last week and when Hillary said,
you haven't been paying
taxes, he said, "That makes me
smart." So it's smart not to pay
for our military? It's
smart not to pay for veterans?
It's smart not to pay for
teachers? And I guess all of
us who do pay for those things,
I guess we're stupid. And the
last thing I'll say is this...
PENCE: Senator, do you take all
the deductions that you're
entitled to?
KAINE: The last thing -- the
last thing I want to ask
Governor Pence is...
PENCE: I do.
KAINE: Governor Pence had to
give Donald Trump his tax
returns to show he was qualified
to
be vice president. Donald Trump
must give the American public
his tax returns to show
that he's qualified to be
president. And he's breaking his
promise.
PENCE: Elaine, I have
to respond to this.
QUIJANO: You get very
little time, 20 seconds.
PENCE: I'll be -- I'll
be very respectful.
QUIJANO: Governor?
PENCE: Look, Donald Trump has
filed over 100 pages of
financial disclosure, which is
what
the law requires.
KAINE: But he said he would
release his tax returns.
QUIJANO: All right, Gentlemen...
PENCE: The American people can
review that. And he's going --
Senator, he's going to release
his tax returns when
the audit is over...
QUIJANO: ... I need to ask
you about Social Security...
KAINE: Richard Nixon released
tax returns when he was under
audit.
PENCE: They're going to raise
your taxes. We're going to cut
your taxes.
QUIJANO: Gentlemen...
KAINE: If you can't meet
Nixon's standard...
QUIJANO: The people at home
cannot understand either one of
you when you speak over each
other. I would please ask you to
wait until it is that the other
is finished.
KAINE: All right. We're
having fun up here.
QUIJANO: Senator Kaine, on the
issue of Social Security, in 18
years, when the Social Security
Trust Funds run out of money,
you'll be 76. The Committee for
a Responsible Federal Budget
estimates your benefits could be
cut by as much as $7,500 per
year. What would your
administration
do to prevent this cut?
KAINE: First, we're going to
protect Social Security, which
is one of the greatest programs
that the American government has
ever done. It happened at a time
when you would work
your whole life, your whole
life, raising your kids,
working, being a Little League
coach or a Sunday school
teacher, and then you would
retire into poverty. And Social
Security has enabled people to
retire with dignity and
overwhelmingly not be in
poverty.
We have to keep it solvent. And
we will keep it solvent. And
we'll look for strategies
like adjusting the payroll tax
cap upward in order to do that.
Here's what Hillary and I will
not do. And I want to make this
very plain. We will never,
ever engage in a risky scheme to
privatize Social Security.
Donald Trump wrote a book
and he said Social Security is a
Ponzi scheme and privatization
would be good for all of
us.
And when Congressman Pence was
in Congress, he was the chief
cheerleader for the
privatization
of Social Security. Even after
President Bush stopped pushing
for it, Congressman Pence
kept pushing for it. We're going
to stand up against efforts to
privatize Social Security.
And we'll look for ways to keep
it solvent going forward,
focusing primarily on the
payroll
tax cap.
QUIJANO: Governor Pence, I'll
give you an opportunity to
respond.
PENCE: Well, thanks, Elaine.
There they go again. OK...
KAINE: Go read --
go read the book.
PENCE: All Donald Trump -- all
Donald Trump and I have said
about Social Security is we're
going to meet our obligations
to our seniors. That's it.
KAINE: Go read the book.
PENCE: We've said we're going to
meet the obligations of
Medicare. That's what this
campaign is really about,
Senator. And I get, this is --
this is the old scare tactic
that
they roll out...
KAINE: But -- but you have
a voting record, Governor.
PENCE: And I get all of
that. I just, look...
KAINE: I...
PENCE: There's a question that
you asked a little bit earlier
that I want to go back
to.
KAINE: I can't believe that you
won't defend your own voting
record.
PENCE: I have to go back to.
QUIJANO: We...
PENCE: Well, look, I -- you're
running with Hillary Clinton,
who wants to raise taxes
by $1 trillion, increase
spending by $2 trillion, and you
say you're going to keep the
promises
of Social Security. Donald Trump
and I are going to cut taxes.
We're going to -- we're
going to -- we're going to...
KAINE: You're not going to cut
taxes. You're going to raise
taxes on the middle class.
PENCE: ... reform government
programs so we can meet the
obligations of Social Security
and Medicare.
QUIJANO: All right. PENCE: Stay
on the path that your party has
us on, we're going to
be in a -- in a mountain range
of debt. And we're going to face
hard choices and...
(CROSSTALK)
QUIJANO: Gentleman, I
want to move on now.
KAINE: You did ask this question
about debt, and the debt
explosion on the Trump plan is
much, much bigger than
anything on the Clinton side.
QUIJANO: All right.
Let me move on now...
PENCE: Three hundred and five
(ph) economists said your plan
is bad for the economy.
QUIJANO: ... to the issue of law
enforcement and race relations.
Law enforcement and race
relations. After the Dallas
police shooting, Police Chief
David Brown said, quote, "We're
asking cops to do too much in
this country. Every societal
failure we put it off on the
cops to solve. Not enough mental
health funding, not enough drug
addiction funding, schools
fail, let's give
it to the cops."
Do we ask too much of police
officers in this country? And
how would you specifically
address
the chief's concerns?
Senator Kaine?
KAINE: Elaine, I think that's a
very fair comment. I think we
put a lot on police shoulders.
And this is something I got a
lot of scar tissue and
experience on.
I was a city councilman and
mayor in Richmond. And when I
came in, we had one of the
highest
homicide rates in the United
States. We fought very, very
hard over the course of my time
in local office with our police
department, and we reduced our
homicide rate nearly in
half.
And then when I was governor of
Virginia, we worked hard, too.
And we did something
we had really wanted to do. For
the first time ever, we cracked
the top 10, 10 safest
states, because we
worked together.
Here's what I learned as a mayor
and a governor. The way you make
communities safer and the
way you make police safer is
through community policing. You
build the bonds between the
community and the police force,
build bonds of understanding,
and then when people feel
comfortable in their
communities, that gap between
the police and the communities
they
serve narrows. And when that gap
narrows, it's safer for the
communities and it's safer
for the police.
That model still works across
our country, but there are some
other models that don't
work, an overly aggressive, more
militarized model. Donald Trump
recently said we need
to do more stop-and-frisk around
the country. That would be a big
mistake because it polarizes
the relationship between the
police and the community.
So here's what we'll do. We'll
focus on community policing. We
will focus on -- and Hillary
Clinton has rolled out a really
comprehensive mental health
reform package that she worked
on with law enforcement
professionals, and we will also
fight the scourge of gun
violence
in the United States.
I'm a gun-owner. I'm a strong
Second Amendment supporter. But
I've got a lot of scar tissue,
because when I was governor of
Virginia, there was a horrible
shooting at Virginia Tech,
and we learned that through that
painful situation that gaps in
the background record check
system
should have been closed and it
could have prevented that crime,
and so we're going to
work to do things like close
background record checks. And if
we do, we won't have the
tragedies
that we did.
One of those killed at Virginia
Tech was a guy named Liviu
Librescu. He was a
70-plus-year-old
Romanian Holocaust survivor. He
had survived the Holocaust. Then
he survived the Soviet
Union takeover of his country.
But then he was a visiting
professor at Virginia Tech,
and he couldn't survive the
scourge of gun violence.
We can support the Second
Amendment and do things like
background record checks and
make
us safer, and that will
make police safer, too.
QUIJANO: Governor Pence?
PENCE: You know, my uncle was a
cop, a career cop, on the beat
in downtown Chicago. He was
my hero when I was growing up.
And we'd go up to visit my dad's
family in Chicago. My
three brothers and I would
marvel at my uncle when he would
come out in his uniform, sidearm
at his side.
Police officers are the best of
us. And the men and women,
white, African-American, Asian,
Latino, Hispanic, they put their
lives on the line every single
day. And let my say,
at the risk of agreeing with
you, community policing is a
great idea. It's worked in the
Hoosier state. And we
fully support that.
Donald Trump and I are going to
make sure that law enforcement
have the resources and
the tools to be able to really
restore law and order to the
cities and communities in
this nation. It's probably --
probably why the 330,000 members
of the Fraternal Order
of Police endorsed Donald Trump
as the next president of the
United States of America,
because they see his commitment
to them. They see his commitment
to law and order.
But they also -- they also hear
the bad mouthing, the bad
mouthing that comes from people
that
seize upon tragedy in the wake
of police action shootings as --
as a reason to -- to use a
broad brush to accuse law
enforcement of -- of implicit
bias or institutional racism.
And
that really has got to stop.
I mean, when an African-American
police officer in Charlotte
named Brentley Vinson, an
all-star
football player who went to
Liberty University here in the
state, came home, followed his
dad into law enforcement, joined
the force in Charlotte, joined
the force in Charlotte
in 2014, was involved in a
police action shooting that
claimed the life of Keith --
Keith Lamont
Scott, it was a tragedy. I mean,
I -- we -- we mourn with those
who mourn. We -- we grieve
with those who grieve. And we're
saddened at the loss of life.
But Hillary Clinton actually
referred to that moment as an
example of implicit bias in the
police force, where -- where she
used -- when she was asked in
the debate a week ago whether
there was implicit bias in law
enforcement, her only answer was
that there's implicit
bias in everyone in the United
States. I just think...
KAINE: Can I -- can I explain...
PENCE: ... I just think what we
ought to do is we ought to stop
seizing on these moments
of tragedy. We ought to assure
the public that we'll have a
full and complete and
transparent
investigation whenever there's a
loss of life because of police
action. But, Senator, please,
you know, enough of this seeking
every opportunity to demean law
enforcement broadly by making
the accusation of implicit bias
every time tragedy occurs.
KAINE: Elaine -- Elaine, people
shouldn't be afraid to bring up
issues of bias in law
enforcement. And if
you're afraid to have...
PENCE: I'm not afraid
to bring that up.
KAINE: And if -- if you're
afraid to have the discussion,
you'll never solve it. And
so here's -- here's an example,
heartbreaking. We would agree
this was a heartbreaking
example.
The guy, Philando Castile, who
was killed in St. Paul, he was a
worker, a valued worker
in a local school. And he was
killed for no apparent reason in
an incident that will be
discussed and will
be investigated.
But when folks went and explored
this situation, what they found
is that Philando Castile,
who was a -- they called him Mr.
Rogers with Dreadlocks in the
school that he worked. The
kids loved him. But he had been
stopped by police 40 or 50 times
before that fatal incident.
And if you look at sentencing in
this country, African-Americans
and Latinos get sentenced
for the same crimes at
very different rates.
PENCE: We need criminal
justice reform.
KAINE: Well, we do.
PENCE: Indiana has passed
criminal justice reform.
KAINE: But I just want to say,
those who say that we should
not...
PENCE: But that's not what
you're talking about.
KAINE: ... we should not be able
to bring up and talk about bias
in the system, we'll
never solve the problem...
QUIJANO: Governor Pence...
(CROSSTALK)
PENCE: Senator, when
African-American police officers
involved in a police action
shooting
involving an African-American,
why would Hillary Clinton accuse
that African-American police
officer of implicit bias?
KAINE: Well, I guess I can't
believe you are defending the
position that there is no bias
and it's a topic
we don't even...
(CROSSTALK)
QUIJANO: Governor Pence, I
have a question on that point.
PENCE: I did not make
that statement. I...
QUIJANO: Your fellow Republican,
Governor Pence, Senator Tim
Scott, who is African-American,
recently spoke on the Senate
floor. He said he was stopped
seven times by law enforcement
in one year.
KAINE: A U.S. senator.
QUIJANO: He said, "I have felt
the anger, the frustration, the
sadness, and the humiliation
that comes with feeling like
you're being targeted for
nothing more than being just
yourself." What would you say to
Senator Scott about his
experiences?
PENCE: Well, I have the deepest
respect for Senator Scott, and
he's a close friend. And
what I would say is that we --
we need to adopt criminal
justice reform nationally.
I -- I signed criminal justice
reform in the state of Indiana,
Senator, and we're very
proud of it.
I worked when I was Congress on
a second chance act. We have got
to do a better job recognizing
and correcting the errors in the
system that do reflect on
institutional bias in criminal
justice. But what -- what --
what Donald Trump and I are
saying is let's not have the
reflex
of assuming the worst of men and
women in law enforcement. We
truly do believe that
law enforcement is not a force
for racism or division in our
country...
KAINE: Elaine, can I...
QUIJANO: So what would you say
to Senator Scott, Governor?
PENCE: Law enforcement in this
country is a force for good.
They are the -- they truly
are people that put their lives
on the line every single day.
But I would -- I would suggest
to you, what we need to do is
assert a stronger leadership at
the national level to support
law enforcement. You just heard
Senator Kaine reject
stop-and-frisk. Well, I would
suggest
to you that the families that
live in our inner cities that
are besieged by crime...
KAINE: Elaine, let
me -- let me...
QUIJANO: Governor, the question
is about Senator Scott. What
would -- what would you tell
Senator
Scott?
KAINE: Elaine, if I could -- if
I could jump in. I've heard
Senator Scott make that eloquent
plea. And look, criminal justice
is about respecting the law and
being respected by
the law. So there is a
fundamental respect issue here.
And I just want to talk about
the tone that's set from the
top. Donald Trump during his
campaign has called Mexicans
rapists and criminals. He's
called women slobs, pigs, dogs,
disgusting.
I don't like saying that in
front of my wife and my mother.
He attacked an Indiana-born
federal judge and said he was
unqualified to hear a federal
lawsuit because his parents
were Mexican. He went after John
McCain, a POW, and said he
wasn't hero because he'd
been captured. He said
African-Americans are living in
Hell. And he perpetrated this
outrageous
and bigoted lie that President
Obama is not a U.S. citizen.
If you want to have a society
where people are respected and
respect laws, you can't
have somebody at the top who
demeans every group that he
talks about. And I just --
again,
I cannot believe that Governor
Pence will defend the
insult-driven campaign that
Donald
Trump has run.
QUIJANO: All right. I want to
turn to our next segment now,
immigration. Your running
mates have both said that
undocumented immigrants who have
committed violent crimes should
be
deported. What would you tell
the millions of undocumented
immigrants who have not
committed
violent crimes? Governor Pence?
PENCE: Donald Trump's laid out a
plan to end illegal immigration
once and for all in this
country. We've been talking it
to death for 20 years. Hillary
Clinton and Tim Kaine want
to continue the policies of open
borders, amnesty, catch and
release, sanctuary cities,
all the things that are driving
-- that are driving wages down
in this country, Senator,
and also too often with criminal
aliens in the country, it's
bringing heartbreak.
But I -- Donald Trump has a plan
that he laid out in Arizona,
that will deal systemically
with illegal immigration,
beginning with border security,
internal enforcement. It's
probably
why for the first time in the
history of Immigration and
Customs Enforcement their union
actually
endorsed Donald Trump as the
next president of the United
States, because they know they
need help to enforce the
laws of this country.
And Donald Trump has laid out a
priority to remove criminal
aliens, remove people that
have overstayed their visas. And
-- and once we have accomplished
all of that, which will
-- which will strengthen our
economy, strengthen the rule of
law in the country and make our
communities safer once the
criminal aliens are out, then
we'll deal with those that
remain.
But I have to tell you, I just
-- I was listening to the
avalanche of insults coming out
of
Senator Kaine a minute ago.
KAINE: These were Donald's --
hold on a second, Governor.
(CROSSTALK)
PENCE: It's my time, Senator.
QUIJANO: It is, in fact,
the governor's time.
KAINE: I apologize. It's your
two minutes. I apologize.
PENCE: Thanks. I forgive you. He
says ours is an insult-driven
campaign. Did you all
just hear that? Ours is an
insult-driven campaign?
I mean, to be honest with you,
if Donald Trump had said all of
the things that you've said
he said in the way you said he
said them, he still wouldn't
have a fraction of the insults
that Hillary Clinton leveled
when she said that half of our
supporters were a basket
of deplorables. It's -- she said
they were irredeemable, they
were not American.
I mean, it's extraordinary. And
then she labeled one after
another "ism" on millions of
Americans
who believe that we can have a
stronger America at home and
abroad, who believe we can get
this economy moving again, who
believe that we can end illegal
immigration once and for
all. So, Senator, this -- this
insult-driven campaign, I
mean...
QUIJANO: Governor...
PENCE: That's small potatoes
compared to Hillary Clinton...
QUIJANO: Senator Kaine?
PENCE: .... calling half of
Donald Trump's supporters a
basket of deplorables.
KAINE: Hillary Clinton said
something on the campaign trail,
and the very next day, she
said, you know what, I
shouldn't have said that.
PENCE: She said she
shouldn't have said half.
QUIJANO: Governor, this is
Senator Kaine's two minutes,
please.
KAINE: Yeah, that's
right, so now we're even.
PENCE: Yeah.
(LAUGHTER)
KAINE: Look for Donald trump
apologizing to John McCain for
saying he wasn't a hero...
PENCE: Oh...
KAINE: ... to Donald Trump
apologizing for calling women
slobs, pigs, dogs, disgusting.
PENCE: She apologized
for saying "half."
QUIJANO: Governor. It is
his two minutes, please.
KAINE: Did Donald Trump
apologize for taking after
somebody in a Twitter war and
making
fun of her weight? Did he
apologize for saying
African-Americans are living in
Hell? Did
he apologize for saying
President Obama was not even a
citizen of the United States?
You
will look in vain to see Donald
Trump ever taking responsibility
for anybody and apologizing.
Immigration. There's two plans
on the table. Hillary and I
believe in comprehensive
immigration
reform. Donald Trump believes in
deportation nation. You've got
to pick your choice. Hillary
and I want a bipartisan reform
that will put keeping families
together as the top goal,
second, that will help focus
enforcement efforts on those who
are violent, third, that will
do more border control, and,
fourth, that will provide a path
to citizenship for those
who work hard, pay taxes, play
by the rules, and take criminal
background record checks.
That's our proposal. Donald
Trump proposes to deport 16
million people, 11 million who
are here without documents. And
both Donald Trump and Mike Pence
want to get rid of birthright
citizenship. So if you're born
here, but your parents don't
have documents, they want to
eliminate that. That's
another 4.5 million people.
These guys -- and Donald Trump
have said it -- deportation
force. They want to go house
to house, school to school,
business to business, and kick
out 16 million people. And I
cannot
believe...
PENCE: That's nonsense.
That's nonsense.
KAINE: I cannot believe that
Governor Pence would sit here
and defend his running mate's
claim that we should create a
deportation force to -- so that
they'll all be gone.
PENCE: Senator, we have a
deportation force. It's called
Immigrations and Customs
Enforcement.
And the union for Immigrations
and Customs Enforcement for the
first time in their history
endorsed Donald Trump to be the
next president of the United
States of America.
KAINE: So you like the
16 million deportations?
PENCE: Senator, that's -- that's
nonsense. Look, what you just
heard is they have a plan
for open borders,
amnesty. That's...
(CROSSTALK)
KAINE: Our plan is like Ronald
Reagan's plan from 1986.
PENCE: They call it
comprehensive immigration reform
-- they call it comprehensive
immigration
reform on Capitol Hill. We all
know the routine. It's amnesty.
And you heard one of the last
things he mentioned
was border security.
PENCE: That's how
Washington always plays it.
KAINE: No, I...
PENCE: They always say we're
going to do this, we're going to
do that, we'll eventually get
the border...
(CROSSTALK)
KAINE: ... border security three
years ago, and Governor Pence
was against it.
QUIJANO: Governor, Mr.
Trump has said...
PENCE: Ronald Reagan said a
nation without borders is not a
nation. Donald Trump is
committed
to restoring the borders of this
nation and securing our nation,
enforcing our laws.
QUIJANO: So, Governor, how would
these millions of undocumented
immigrants leave? Would they
be forcibly removed?
PENCE: Well, I think Donald
Trump laid out a series of
priorities that doesn't ends
with
border security. It begins with
border security. And after we
secure the border, not only
build
a wall, but beneath the ground
and in the air, we do internal
enforcement.
But he said the focus has to be
on criminal aliens. We just --
we just had a conversation
about law enforcement. We just
had a conversation about the --
the violence that's besetting
our cities. The reality is that
there's heartbreak and tragedy
that has struck American
families
because people that came into
this country illegally are now
involved in criminal enterprise
and activity. And we don't have
the resources or the will to
deport them systemically.
Donald Trump has said we're
going to move those people out,
people who've overstayed
their visas. We're going to
enforce the law of this country.
We're going to strengthen
Immigrations and Customs
Enforcements with more resources
and more personnel to be able
to do that. And then Donald
Trump has made it clear, once
we've done all of those things,
that we're going to reform the
immigration system that we
have...
KAINE: I just have to
correct Governor Pence....
PENCE: ... where people can
come into this country.
KAINE: I have to...
PENCE: That's the order that you
should do it. Border security,
removing criminal aliens,
upholding with law, and then --
but then, Senator, I'll work you
when you go back to
the Senate, I promise you, we'll
work you to reform the
immigration system.
KAINE: I look forward to working
together in whatever capacities
we serve in. But I
just want to make it very, very
clear that he's trying to fuzz
up what Donald Trump has
said. When Donald Trump spoke in
Phoenix, he looked the audience
in the eye and he said,
no, we're building a wall, and
we're deporting everybody. He
said, quote, "They will all
be gone." "They will all be
gone." And this is one of these
ones where you can just go
to the tape on it and see what
Donald Trump has said. And to
add...
PENCE: He's talking
about criminal aliens.
KAINE: And to add to it, and to
add to it, and to add to it, we
are a nation of immigrants.
Mike Pence and I both are
descended from immigrant
families. Some things, you know,
maybe weren't
said so great about the Irish
when they came, but we've done
well by absorbing immigrants,
and it's made our
nation stronger.
When Donald Trump says Mexicans
are rapists and criminals,
Mexican immigrants, when Donald
Trump says about your judge, a
Hoosier judge, he said that
Judge Curiel was unqualified
to hear a case because his
parents were Mexican, I can't
imagine how you could defend
that.
QUIJANO: Gentleman, I'd like to
shift now to the threat of
terrorism. Do you think the
world today is a safer or more
dangerous place than it was
eight years ago? Has the
terrorist
threat increased or
decreased? Senator Kaine?
KAINE: The terrorist threat has
decreased in some ways, because
bin Laden is dead. The
terrorist threat has decreased
in some ways because an Iranian
nuclear weapons program
has been stopped. The terrorist
threat to United States troops
has been decreased in
some ways because there's not
175,000 in a dangerous part of
the world. There's only
15,000.
But there are other parts of the
world that are challenging. Let
me tell you this: To
beat terrorism, there's only one
candidate who can do it, and
it's Hillary Clinton. Remember,
Hillary Clinton was the senator
from New York on 9/11. She was
there at the World Trade
Center when they were still
searching for victims and
survivors. That's seared onto
her, the need to beat terrorism.
And she's got a plan to do it.
She was part of the national
security team that wiped out
bin Laden. Here's her plan to
defeat ISIL. First, we've got to
keep taking out their
leaders on the battlefield. She
was part of the team that got
bin Laden, and she'll lead
the team that will get Abu Bakr
al-Baghdadi, the head of ISIS.
Second, we've got to disrupt
financing networks, third,
disrupt their ability to recruit
on
the Internet, in their safe
havens. But, fourth, we also
have to work with allies to
share
and surge intelligence. That's
the Hillary Clinton plan; she's
got the experience to
do it.
Donald Trump. Donald Trump can't
start a Twitter war with Miss
Universe without shooting
himself
in the foot. Donald Trump
doesn't have a plan. He said, "I
have a secret plan," and then
he said, "Um, I know more than
all the generals about ISIL."
And then he said, "I'm going
to call the generals to help me
figure out a plan." And finally
he said, "I'm going to
fire all the generals."
He doesn't have a plan.
But he does have dangerous
ideas. Here's four. He trash
talks the military. The military
is a disaster, John McCain's no
hero, the generals need all to
be fired, and I know
more than them. He wants to tear
up alliances. NATO is obsolete,
and we'll only work together
with Israel if they
pay "big league."
Third, he loves dictators. He's
got kind of a personal Mount
Rushmore, Vladimir Putin,
Kim Jong-un, Moammar Gadhafi...
PENCE: Oh, please. Come on.
KAINE: ... and Saddam Hussein.
And last and most dangerously,
Donald Trump believes -- Donald
Trump believes that the world
will be safer if more nations
have nuclear weapons. He's
said Saudi Arabia should get
them, Japan should get them,
Korea should get them. And when
he was confronted with this, and
told, wait a minute, terrorists
could get those, proliferation
could lead to nuclear war,
here's what Donald Trump said,
and I quote: "Go ahead, folks,
enjoy yourselves."
I'd love to hear Governor Pence
tell me what's so enjoyable or
comical about nuclear war.
QUIJANO: Governor Pence?
PENCE: Did you work on that one
a long time? Because that had a
lot of really creative
lines in it.
KAINE: Well, I'm going to see
if you can defend any of it.
PENCE: Well, look, I can defend
-- I -- I -- I can -- I can make
very clear to the American
people, after traveling millions
of miles as our secretary of
state, after being the
architect of the foreign policy
of this administration, America
is less safe today than it was
the
day that Barack Obama became
president of the United States.
It's absolutely inarguable.
We've weakened America's place
in the world. It's been a
combination of factors, but
mostly
it's been a lack of leadership.
I mean, I will give you -- and I
was in Washington,
D.C., on 9/11. I saw the clouds
of smoke rise from the Pentagon.
KAINE: I was in Virginia
where the Pentagon's...
(CROSSTALK)
PENCE: I know you were. We all
lived through that day as a
nation. It was heartbreaking.
And I want to give this
president credit for bringing
Osama bin Laden to justice.
But the truth is, Osama bin
Laden led Al Qaida. Our primary
threat today is ISIS. And
because
Hillary Clinton failed to
renegotiate a status of forces
agreement that would have
allowed
some American combat troops to
remain in Iraq and secure the
hard fought gains the American
soldier had won by 2009, ISIS
was able to be literally
conjured up out of the desert,
and it's overrun vast areas that
the American soldier had won in
Operation Iraqi Freedom.
My heart breaks for the likes of
Lance Cpl. Scott Zubowski. He
fell in Fallujah in 2005.
He fought hard through some of
the most difficult days in
Operation Iraqi Freedom, and he
paid
the ultimate sacrifice to defend
our freedom and secure that
nation. And that nation was
secured in 2009.
But because Hillary Clinton and
Barack Obama failed to provide a
status of forces agreement
and leave sufficient troops in
there, we are back at war. The
president just ordered more
troops on the ground. We are
back at war in Iraq. And Scott
Zubowski, whose mom would
always come to Memorial Day
events in Newcastle, Indiana, to
see me, and I'd give her a hug
and tell her we're never going
to forget her son and we never
will, Scott Zubowski and
the sacrifices the American
soldier made were squandered in
Iraq because this administration
created a vacuum in which
ISIS was able to grow.
And a reference to the Iranian
deal, the Iranian deal that
Hillary Clinton initiated, $150
billion to the radical
mullahs in Iran.
KAINE: Stopping a nuclear
weapons program without firing a
shot?
PENCE: You didn't stop the
nuclear weapons program.
KAINE: Yes, we did.
PENCE: You essentially...
KAINE: Even the Israeli
military says it stopped.
PENCE: ... guaranteed that Iran
will someday become a nuclear
power, because there's no
limitations once the period of
time of the treaty comes off.
QUIJANO: Governor Pence, Mr.
Trump has proposed extreme
vetting of immigrants from parts
of
the world that export terrorism.
But that does not address many
of the recent terrorist
attacks in the United States,
such as the Orlando nightclub
massacre and the recent
bombings in New York and New
Jersey. Those were homegrown,
committed by U.S. citizens
and legal residents. What
specific tools would you use to
prevent those kinds of attacks?
PENCE: Well, I think it's -- I
think it's a great question,
Elaine, but it really does
begin with us reforming our
immigration system and putting
the interests, particularly the
safety and security of the
American people, first.
I mean, Donald Trump has called
for extreme vetting for people
coming into this country
so that we don't bring people
into the United States who are
hostile to our Bill of Rights
freedoms, who are hostile
to the American way life.
But also, Donald Trump and I are
committed to suspending the
Syrian refugee program and
programs and immigration from
areas of the world that have
been compromised by terrorism.
Hillary Clinton and Tim Kaine
want to increase the Syrian
refugee program by 500...
(CROSSTALK)
KAINE: Elaine, I want to...
QUIJANO: Governor, the
question was about homegrown.
PENCE: Yeah, and so -- but
first, you know, let's make sure
we're putting the safety and
security of the American people
first instead of Hillary Clinton
expanding the Syrian refugee
program...
KAINE: Or instead of you
violating the Constitution by
blocking people based on their
national
origin rather than whether
they're dangerous.
PENCE: That's not --
that's absolutely false.
KAINE: That's what the Seventh
Circuit decided just -- here's
the difference, Elaine.
PENCE: The Seventh Circuit...
KAINE: We have different views
on -- on refugee issues and on
immigration. Hillary and I want
to do enforcement based on, are
people dangerous? These guys say
all Mexicans are bad.
PENCE: That's absolutely false.
KAINE: And with respect to
refugees, we want to keep people
out if they're dangerous. Donald
Trump said keep them out if
they're Muslim. Mike Pence...
PENCE: Absolutely...
KAINE: ... put a program in
place to keep them out if
they're from Syria. And
yesterday
an appellate court with three
Republican judges struck down
the Pence plan...
PENCE: Right. Right.
KAINE: ... and said it
was discriminatory...
PENCE: And those judges
-- those judges said...
KAINE: We should focus upon
danger, not upon discrimination.
QUIJANO: Governor?
PENCE: Elaine, to your point,
those judges said it was because
there wasn't any evidence
yet that -- that ISIS had
infiltrated the United States.
Well, Germany just arrested
three Syrian refugees that
were connected to ISIS.
(CROSSTALK)
KAINE: But they told you there's
a right way and a wrong way to
do it.
PENCE: But, look, if you're
going to be critical of me on
that, that's fair game. I will
tell
you, after two Syrian refugees
were involved in the attack in
Paris that is called Paris'
9/11, as governor of the state
of Indiana, I have no higher
priority than the safety
and security of the
people of my state.
KAINE: But, Governor Pence...
PENCE: So you bet I
suspended that program.
KAINE: But, Governor
Pence, I just...
PENCE: And I stand by that
decision. And if I'm vice
president of the United States
or
Donald Trump is president, we're
going to put the safety and
security of the American
people first.
KAINE: Sure. Can we just be
clear -- Hillary and I will do
immigration enforcement and
we'll vet refugees based on
whether they're dangerous or
not. We won't do it based on
discriminating against you from
the country you come from or the
religion that you practice.
PENCE: But the
problem with that...
KAINE: That is completely
antithetical to the Jeffersonian
values of...
(CROSSTALK)
PENCE: Elaine, the director of
the FBI, our homeland security,
said we can't know for
certain who these people
are coming from Syria.
KAINE: Yes, we can, and when we
don't let them know, we don't
let them in.
PENCE: So -- the FBI...
KAINE: When we don't know who
they are, we don't let them in.
PENCE: The FBI and homeland
security said we can't know for
certain. You've got to err
on the side of the safety and
security of the American people,
Senator. I understand
the...
KAINE: By trashing all Syrians
or trashing all Muslims?
PENCE: ... the U.N. wants us to
expand the Syrian refugee
program...
QUIJANO: Senator Kaine, let me
ask you this. Secretary
Clinton...
PENCE: We're going to put the
safety and security of the
American people first.
QUIJANO: ... has talked about
an intelligence surge.
KAINE: Yes.
QUIJANO: What exactly would an
intelligence surge look like?
And how would that help identify
terrorists with no operational
connection to a foreign
terrorist organization?
KAINE: Intelligence surge is
two-thirds, Elaine. It's two
things. It's, first,
dramatically
expanding our intelligence
capacities by hiring great
professionals, but also we've
got some
of the best intel and cyber
employees in the world right
here in the United States
working
for many of our private
sector companies.
So it involves increasing our
own workforce, but striking
great partnerships with some
of our cyber and intel experts
in the private sector so that we
can, consistent with
constitutional
principles, gather
more intelligence.
But the second piece of this is
really, really important. It
also means creating stronger
alliances, because you gather
intelligence and then you share
your intelligence back
and forth with allies. And
that's how you find out who may
be trying to recruit, who
may be trying to come to one
country or the next. Alliances
are critical.
That's why Donald Trump's claim
that he wants to -- that NATO is
obsolete and that we need
to get rid of NATO
is so dangerous.
PENCE: That's not his plan.
KAINE: Well, he said NATO is
obsolete. And, look, if you put
aside -- push aside your
alliances, who you're going to
share intelligence with? Hillary
Clinton is the secretary of
state who knows how to build
alliances. She built the
sanctions
regime around the word that
stopped the Iranian nuclear
weapons program. And that's what
an
intelligence surge means. Better
skill and capacity, but also
better alliances.
QUIJANO: All right. I'd like to
turn now to the tragedy in
Syria. Two hundred fifty
thousand...
PENCE: Can I speak about the
cybersecurity surge at all?
QUIJANO: You can -- you can have
30 seconds, Governor, quickly,
please.
PENCE: First, Donald Trump just
spoke about this issue this
week. We have got to bring
together the best resources of
this country to understand that
cyber warfare is the new
warfare of the asymmetrical
enemies that we face in this
country. And I look forward if
I'm privileged to be in this
role of working with you in the
Senate to make sure that we
resource that effort.
KAINE: We will work together
in whatever roles we inhabit.
PENCE: We have an intelligence,
sir (ph). But I will also tell
you that it's important
in this moment to remember that
Hillary Clinton had a private
server in her home that had
classified information on it...
QUIJANO: And I don't --
30 seconds is on up.
PENCE: ... about drone strikes,
e-mails from the president of
the United States of America
were on there.
QUIJANO: Right.
PENCE: Her private server was
subject to being hacked by
foreign...
(CROSSTALK)
QUIJANO: I'd like to ask
you about Syria, Governor.
PENCE: We could put
cybersecurity first if we just
make sure the next secretary of
state
doesn't have a private server.
(CROSSTALK)
KAINE: And all investigation
concluded that not one
reasonable prosecutor would take
any
additional step. You don't get
to decide the rights and wrongs
of this. We have a justice
system that does that. And a
Republican FBI director did an
investigation and concluded
that...
(CROSSTALK) QUIJANO: All right,
we are moving on now. Two
hundred fifty thousand people...
PENCE: If your son or my son
handled classified information
the way Hillary Clinton did...
QUIJANO: ... one hundred
thousand of them children --
Governor...
PENCE: ... they'd
be court martialed.
KAINE: That is absolutely
false and you know that.
PENCE: Absolutely true.
KAINE: And you know
that, Governor.
QUIJANO: Governor...
PENCE: It's absolutely true.
QUIJANO: Gentlemen, please.
KAINE: Because the FBI
did an investigation.
QUIJANO: Gentlemen.
KAINE: And they concluded that
there was no reasonable
prosecutor who would take it
further.
Sorry.
QUIJANO: Senator Kaine,
Governor Pence, please.
KAINE: Syria.
QUIJANO: I want to turn now to
Syria. Two hundred fifty
thousand people, 100,000 of
them children, are under siege
in Aleppo, Syria. Bunker buster
bombs, cluster munitions,
and incendiary weapons are being
dropped on them by Russian and
Syrian militaries. Does
the U.S. have a responsibility
to protect civilians and prevent
mass casualties on this
scale, Governor Pence?
PENCE: The United States of
America needs to begin to
exercise strong leadership to
protect the vulnerable citizens
and over 100,000 children in
Aleppo. Hillary Clinton's top
priority when she became
secretary of state was the
Russian reset, the Russians
reset.
After the Russian reset, the
Russians invaded Ukraine and
took over Crimea.
And the small and bullying
leader of Russia is now
dictating terms to the United
States
to the point where all the
United States of America -- the
greatest nation on Earth -- just
withdraws from talks about a
cease-fire while Vladimir Putin
puts a missile defense system
in Syria while he marshals the
forces and begins -- look, we
have got to begin to lean
into this with strong,
broad-shouldered American
leadership.
It begins by rebuilding our
military. And the Russians and
the Chinese have been making
enormous investments in the
military. We have the smallest
Navy since 1916. We have the
lowest number of troops since
the end of the Second World War.
We've got to work with Congress,
and Donald Trump will, to
rebuild our military and project
American strength in the world.
But about Aleppo and about
Syria, I truly do believe that
what America ought to do right
now is immediately establish
safe zones, so that families and
vulnerable families with
children can move out of those
areas, work with our Arab
partners, real time, right now,
to make that happen.
And secondly, I just have to
tell you that the provocations
by Russia need to be met
with American strength. And if
Russia chooses to be involved
and continue, I should say,
to be involved in this barbaric
attack on civilians in Aleppo,
the United States of
America should be prepared to
use military force to strike
military targets of the Assad
regime to prevent them from this
humanitarian crisis that is
taking place in Aleppo.
There's a broad range of other
things that we ought to do, as
well. We ought to deploy
a missile defense shield to the
Czech Republic and Poland which
Hillary Clinton and Barack
Obama pulled back on out of not
wanting to offend the Russians
back in 2009.
QUIJANO: Governor, your
two minutes are up.
PENCE: We've just got to have
American strength on the world
stage. When Donald Trump becomes
president of the United States,
the Russians and other countries
in the world will know
they're dealing with a strong
American president. QUIJANO:
Senator Kaine?
KAINE: Hillary and I also agree
that the establishment of
humanitarian zones in northern
Syria with
the provision of international
human aid, consistent with the
U.N. Security Council
resolution that was passed in
February 2014, would be a very,
very good idea.
And Hillary also has the ability
to stand up to Russia in a way
that this ticket does
not. Donald Trump, again and
again, has praised Vladimir
Putin. And it's clear that he
has
business dealings with Russian
oligarchs who are very connected
to Putin.
The Trump campaign management
team had to be fired a month or
so ago because of those
shadowy connections with
pro-Putin forces. Governor Pence
made the odd claim, he said
inarguably Vladimir Putin is a
better leader than President
Obama. Vladimir Putin has run
his economy into the ground. He
persecutes LGBT folks and
journalists. If you don't know
the difference between
dictatorship and leadership,
then you got to go back to a
fifth-grade civics
class.
I'll tell you what offends me...
PENCE: Well, that offended me.
KAINE: Governor Pence just said
-- Governor Pence just said that
Donald Trump will rebuild
the military. No, he won't.
Donald Trump is avoiding paying
taxes. The New York Times
story -- and we need to get this
-- but the New York Times
suggested that he probably
didn't pay taxes for about 18
years starting in 1995. Those
years included the years of
9/11.
So get this. On 9/11, Hillary
Clinton and Donald Trump's
hometown was attacked by the
worst terrorist attack in the
history of the United States.
Young men and women -- young
men and women signed up to serve
in the military to fight
terrorism. Hillary Clinton went
to
Washington to get funds to
rebuild her city and protect
first responders, but Donald
Trump
was fighting a very different
fight. It was a fight to avoid
paying taxes so that he wouldn't
support the fight
against terror.
QUIJANO: The question was
about Aleppo, Senator.
KAINE: He wouldn't support
troops. He wouldn't -- he
wouldn't support -- this is
important,
Elaine. When a guy running for
president will not support the
troops, not support veterans,
not support teachers,
that's really important.
QUIJANO: Right.
KAINE: And I said about Aleppo,
we do agree the notion is we
have to create a humanitarian
zone in northern Syria.
It's very important.
QUIJANO: Governor Pence, you had
mentioned no-fly zone. Where
would you propose setting
up a safe zone specifically?
How would you keep it safe?
PENCE: Well, first and foremost,
Donald Trump supports our
troops. Donald Trump supports
our veterans.
KAINE: He won't pay taxes.
PENCE: Donald Trump has paid all
the taxes that he's -- do you
not take deductions? How
does that work?
QUIJANO: Gentlemen, this is
about Syria. I'd like to...
(CROSSTALK)
PENCE: Honestly, Senator.
Honestly, Senator.
KAINE: It is about our troops.
It is about our troops.
PENCE: I understand why you want
to change -- I understand why
you want to change the
subject.
KAINE: How can you support the
troops if you won't pay taxes?
PENCE: I understand why you want
to change the subject. And let
me be very clear on this
Russian thing. The
larger question here...
KAINE: Do you think Donald Trump
is smart to not pay taxes?
QUIJANO: Gentlemen, we're going
to have time to get to Russia
here.
PENCE: What we're dealing with
is the -- you know, there's an
old proverb that says the
Russian bear never dies, it just
hibernates. And the truth of the
matter is, the weak and
feckless foreign policy of
Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama
has awakened an aggression
in Russia that first appeared a
few years ago with their move in
Georgia, now their
move into Crimea, now their move
into the wider Middle East.
And all the while, all we do is
fold our arms and say we're not
having talks anymore. To
answer your question, we just
need American strength. We need
to -- we need to marshal
the resources of our allies in
the region, and in the
immediate, we need to act and
act
now to get people
out of harm's way.
QUIJANO: And exactly how would
those safe zones work? How would
they remain safe?
PENCE: The -- the safe zones
would have to be -- as the
senator said, there's already
a framework for this that's been
recognized by the international
community. The United
States of America needs to be
prepared to work with our allies
in the region to create
a route for safe passage and
then to protect people in those
areas, including with a no-fly
zone.
But, look, this is very tough
stuff. I served on the Foreign
Affairs Committee for a decade.
I traveled in and out of that
region for 10 years. I saw what
the American soldier won
in Operation Iraqi Freedom. And
to see the weak and feckless
leadership that Hillary
Clinton was the architect of and
the foreign policy of the Obama
administration...
KAINE: Well, let me --
let me come back...
PENCE: ... is deeply troubling
to me. That will all change the
day Donald Trump becomes
president of the United States.
KAINE: ... and talk about -- let
me talk about the things that
Governor Pence doesn't want
to acknowledge, Elaine. He
doesn't want to acknowledge that
we stopped the Iranian nuclear
weapons program. He doesn't
want to acknowledge...
PENCE: We didn't.
KAINE: ... that Hillary was part
of a team that got bin Laden. He
doesn't want to acknowledge...
PENCE: I just did. KAINE: ...
that it's a good thing, not a
bad thing, that it's a good
thing -- not a bad thing -- that
we're down from 175,000 troops
deployed overseas to 15,000.
But let me tell you what will
really make the Middle East
dangerous. Donald Trump's
idea that more nations should
get nuclear weapons, Saudi
Arabia, Japan, South Korea.
Ronald Reagan said something
really interesting about nuclear
proliferation back in the 1980s.
He said the problem with nuclear
proliferation is that some fool
or maniac could trigger
a catastrophic event. And I
think that's who Governor
Pence's running mate is, exactly
who Governor Reagan
warned us about.
PENCE: And come on. Senator.
Senator, that was even beneath
you and Hillary Clinton.
And that -- that's pretty low.
KAINE: But do you -- do you
think -- do you think we should
have -- more nuclear weapons
in the world will make us safer?
PENCE: Senator, the...
KAINE: That's what
Donald Trump thinks.
PENCE: Ronald Reagan also said
nuclear war should never be
fought because it can never
be won. And the United States of
America needs to make
investments in modernizing our
nuclear
force for both deterrence...
KAINE: But can you defend Donald
Trump's claim that more nations
should get nuclear weapons?
PENCE: ... and assurance to our
allies. But let me go back to
this Iran thing. I mean,
he keeps saying that they
prevented -- that Hillary
Clinton started the deal with
the
Iranians prevented Iran from
getting a nuclear weapon.
(CROSSTALK)
KAINE: That's what the Israeli
joint chiefs of staff is saying
right now.
PENCE: Well, that's not what --
that's not what Israel thinks.
KAINE: Gadi Eizenkot,
you can go check it.
PENCE: You wouldn't
necessarily know that.
KAINE: Go to the tape.
PENCE: I know you boycotted
Prime Minister Netanyahu's
speech when he came before the
Congress.
KAINE: No, I visited him in his
office. I visited him in his
office.
PENCE: You boycotted the speech.
The point is, what this Iran --
so-called Iran deal
did was essentially guarantee --
I mean, when I was in Congress,
I fought hard on a bipartisan
basis with Republican and
Democrat members to move forward
the toughest sanctions, it
-- literally in the history of
the United States, against Iran.
KAINE: And then Hillary
used them to get a deal.
PENCE: We were bringing them to
heel, but the goal was always
that we would only lift
the sanctions if Iran
permanently renounced their
nuclear ambitions.
KAINE: Elaine, let me
just mention one thing.
(CROSSTALK)
PENCE: They have not -- Elaine,
let me finish a sentence. They
have not renounced their
nuclear ambitions. And when the
deal's period runs out, there's
no limitation on them obtaining
weapons. That...
(CROSSTALK)
QUIJANO: And very
quickly, Senator.
KAINE: Elaine...
PENCE: ... and the fact that
they got $1.7 billion in a
ransom payment...
QUIJANO: We need to talk about
Russia. Very quickly, though,
Senator, please.
PENCE: ... is astonishing
to the American people.
KAINE: Six times tonight, I have
said to Governor Pence I can't
imagine how you can defend your
running mate's position on one
issue after the next. And in all
six cases, he's refused
to defend his running mate.
PENCE: Well, let's -- no, no,
don't put words in my mouth.
QUIJANO: All right.
PENCE: He's going...
(CROSSTALK)
KAINE: And yet he is asking
everybody to vote for somebody
that he cannot defend. And I
just think that
should be underlined.
PENCE: No, I'm -- look...
(CROSSTALK)
QUIJANO: All right, gentlemen,
let's talk about Russia. This is
a topic that has come
up.
PENCE: I'm very, very happy to
defend Donald Trump. If he wants
to take these one at a
time, I'll take
them one at a time.
QUIJANO: I will give you
an opportunity to do that.
KAINE: More nations should get
nuclear weapons. Try to defend
that.
PENCE: Don't put words in my
mouth. Well, he never said that,
Senator.
KAINE: He absolutely said it.
Saudi Arabia, South Korea,
Japan.
PENCE: Most of the stuffy
you've said, he's never said.
QUIJANO: Gentlemen, Russia.
Russian President Vladimir Putin
invaded Ukraine, annexed Crimea,
and has provided crucial
military support to the Assad
regime. What steps, if any,
would
your administration take to
counter these actions? Senator
Kaine?
KAINE: You've got to be tough on
Russia. So let's start with not
praising Vladimir Putin
as a great leader. Donald Trump
and Mike Pence have said he's a
great leader. And Donald
Trump has business...
PENCE: No, we haven't.
KAINE: ... has business dealings
-- has business dealings with
Russia that he refuses to
disclose.
Hillary Clinton has gone toe-to-
toe with Russia. She went
toe-to-toe with Russia as
secretary of state to do the New
START Agreement to reduce
Russia's nuclear stockpile.
She's
had the experience doing it.
She went toe-to-toe with Russia
and lodged protests when they
went into Georgia. And
we've done the same thing about
Ukraine, but more than launching
protests, we've put punishing
economic sanctions on Russia
that we need to continue.
Donald Trump, on the other hand,
didn't know that Russia had
invaded the Crimea.
PENCE: Oh, that's nonsense.
KAINE: He was on a TV show a
couple months back, and he said,
"I'll guarantee you this,
Russia's not going into the
Ukraine." And he had to be
reminded that they had gone into
the Crimea two years before.
PENCE: He knew that.
KAINE: Hillary Clinton has gone
toe-to-toe with Russia to work
out a deal on New START.
She got them engaged on a
meaningful way to cap Iran's
nuclear weapons program. And yet
she stood up to them on issues
such as Syria and their invasion
of Georgia. You've got
to have the ability to do
that, and Hillary does.
On the other hand, in Donald
Trump, you have somebody who
praises Vladimir Putin all the
time. America should really
wonder about a President Trump,
who had a campaign manager
with ties to Putin, pro- Putin
elements in the Ukraine, who had
to be fired for that
reason. They should wonder --
when Donald Trump is sitting
down with Vladimir Putin,
is it going to be America's
bottom line or is it going to be
Donald Trump's bottom line
that he's going to be worried
about with all of his business
dealings?
Now, this could be solved if
Donald Trump would be willing to
release his tax returns,
as he told the American public
that he would do. And I know
he's laughing at this, but
every president...
PENCE: But what's it
got to do with Russia?
KAINE: Every president since
Richard Nixon has done it, and
Donald Trump has said I'm
doing business with Russia. The
only way the American public
will see whether he has a
conflict of interest...
PENCE: No, he hasn't said that.
KAINE: He has, actually.
QUIJANO: Senator, your
time is up. Governor?
PENCE: Well, thanks. I'm just
trying to keep up with the
insult-driven campaign on the
other side of the table.
KAINE: You know, I'm just saying
facts about your running mate.
PENCE: Yeah.
KAINE: And I know
you can't defend.
QUIJANO: Senator, please. This
is the governor's two minutes.
PENCE: I'm happy to defend him,
Senator. Don't put words in my
mouth that I'm not defending
him.
KAINE: You're not.
PENCE: I'm happy to defend him.
Most of what you said is
completely false, and the
American
people know that.
KAINE: I'll run through the list
of things where you won't
defend...
PENCE: This isn't the old days
where you can just say stuff and
people believe it.
QUIJANO: Senator, please. This
is Governor Pence's two minutes.
PENCE: Look, this is the
alternative universe of
Washington, D.C., versus
reality. Hillary
Clinton said her number-one
priority was a reset with
Russia. That reset resulted in
the invasion of Ukraine, after
they'd infiltrated with what are
called little green men, Russian
soldiers that were dressing up
like Ukrainian dissidents, and
then they moved all the way
into Crimea, took over the
Crimean Peninsula. Donald Trump
knew that happened. He basically
was saying it's not going to
happen again. The truth of the
matter is that what you have
in the rise of aggressive
Russia, which has had --
increased its influence in Iran,
that's
now -- now because of this deal
is on a pathway in the future to
obtain a nuclear -- the leading
state sponsor of terror in the
world in Iran now has a closer
working relationship with
Russia because of Hillary
Clinton and Barack Obama's
foreign policy and $150 billion
and
sanctions all being lifted.
And then, of course, Syria, I
mean, it really is extraordinary
that -- Syria is imploding.
You just asked a very thoughtful
question about the disaster in
Aleppo. ISIS is headquartered
in Raqqa. It is -- ISIS from
Raqqa has overrun vast areas
that at great sacrifice the
American
soldier won in Operation Iraqi
Freedom, and yet Senator Kaine
still sits here, loyal soldier
-- I get all that -- in saying
that the foreign policy of
Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama
somehow made the world more
secure. I mean, it really is
astonishing that on the day...
KAINE: We even wiped out
the leader of Al Qaida.
PENCE: ... on the day that Iran
released four American
hostages...
KAINE: We stopped Iran from
getting nuclear weapons.
QUIJANO: Governor...
PENCE: ... we delivered $400
million in cash as a ransom
payment for Americans held by
the radical mullahs in Tehran.
(CROSSTALK)
QUIJANO: Governor,
yesterday, Mr. Trump said...
KAINE: And we stopped a nuclear
weapons program without a shot.
QUIJANO: ... quote, "Putin has
no respect for Hillary Clinton
and no respect for Obama."
Why do you think he'll respect
a Trump- Pence administration?
PENCE: Strength.
Plain and simple.
KAINE: Business dealings.
PENCE: Donald Trump -- that's
nonsense. Donald Trump is a
strong leader...
KAINE: Donald Trump's son says
that the Trump organization...
PENCE: ... who is going to
lead with American strength.
QUIJANO: Please, Senator, I'll
give you a chance to respond.
PENCE: We're going to rebuild
our military. And let me -- let
me -- this whole Putin thing.
Look, America is stronger than
Russia. Our economy is 16 times
larger than the Russian
economy. America's political
system is superior to the crony,
corrupt capitalist system in
Russia in every way.
When Donald Trump and I observe
that, as I've said in Syria, in
Iran, in Ukraine, that the
small and bullying leader of
Russia has been stronger on the
world stage than this
administration,
that's stating painful facts.
That's not an endorsement of
Vladimir Putin. That's an
indictment
of the weak and
feckless leadership...
QUIJANO: Senator Kaine?
PENCE: ... of Hillary
Clinton and Barack Obama.
KAINE: Well, this is one where
we can just kind of go to the
tape on it. But Governor
Pence said, inarguably, Vladimir
Putin is a better leader than
President Obama.
PENCE: That is
absolutely inaccurate.
KAINE: And -- and -- and I just
think a guy who praises...
PENCE: He said he's stronger --
he's been stronger on the world
stage.
KAINE: No, he said leader. And
if -- and I'll just say this,
Governor.
PENCE: You just said better.
KAINE: If you mistake leadership
for dictatorship, and you can't
tell the difference, a country
that's running its economy
into the ground...
PENCE: Yeah, here we go. This is
the grade school thing again?
KAINE: ... persecuting
journalists...
PENCE: Right, this
is grade school.
KAINE: ... if you can't tell the
difference, you shouldn't be
commander-in-chief.
PENCE: Yeah. KAINE: And with
Donald Trump -- Donald Trump's
sons say that they have
all these business dealings with
Russia. Those could be disclosed
with tax returns, but they
refuse to do them. Americans
need to worry about whether
Donald Trump will be watching
out for America's bottom
line or his own bottom line.
QUIJANO: Senator Kaine, what
went wrong with the Russia
reset?
KAINE: Vladimir Putin.
Vladimir Putin is a dictator.
QUIJANO: And what would
do you differently?
KAINE: Vladimir Putin is a
dictator. He's not a leader.
Anybody who thinks otherwise
doesn't know Russian history and
they don't know Vladimir Putin.
Hillary Clinton knows
exactly who this guy is. John
McCain said, I look in his eyes
and I see KGB. And Hillary
kind of has that same feeling.
PENCE: Right.
KAINE: So how do deal with him?
You've got to -- we do have to
deal with Russia in a
lot of different ways. There are
areas where we can cooperate. So
it was Hillary Clinton
who worked with Russia on the
New START Treaty to reduce their
nuclear weapons stockpile.
It was Hillary Clinton that
worked with Russia to get them
engaged in a community of
nations
to stop the Iranian nuclear
weapons without firing a shot.
She's not going around praising
Vladimir Putin as a great guy.
But she knows how to sit down
at a table and negotiate tough
deals. This is a very
challenging part of the world,
and
we ought to have a
commander-in-chief who is
prepared and done it, rather
than somebody
who goes around praising
Vladimir Putin as a great
leader.
QUIJANO: All right, I'd like to
ask now about North Korea, Iran
and the threat of nuclear
weapons. North Korea recently
conducted its fifth and most
powerful nuclear test.
PENCE: Right.
QUIJANO: What specific steps
would you take to prevent North
Korea from developing a
nuclear-armed
missile capable of reaching the
United States? Governor Pence?
PENCE: Well, first, we need to
-- we need to make a commitment
to rebuild our military,
including modernizing our
nuclear forces. And we also need
-- we also need an effective
American diplomacy that will
marshal the resources of nations
in the Asian Pacific Rim to put
pressure on North Korea, on Kim
Jong-un, to abandon his nuclear
ambitions. It has to remain
the policy of the United States
of America the denuclearization
of the Korean Peninsula,
plain and simple.
And when Donald Trump is
president of the United States,
we're -- we're not going to
have the -- the kind of posture
in the world that has Russia
invading Crimea and Ukraine,
that has the Chinese building
new islands in the South China
Sea, that has literally
the world, including North
Korea, flouting American power.
We're going to -- we're going
to go back to the days of
peace through strength.
But I have to tell you that --
that all this talk about tax
returns -- and I get it, you
know, you want to keep bringing
that up. It must have -- must
have...
KAINE: Until he...
(CROSSTALK)
PENCE: ... done well in some
focus group. But here -- Hillary
Clinton and her husband
set up a private foundation
called the Clinton Foundation.
While she was secretary of
state,
the Clinton Foundation accepted
tens of millions of dollars from
foreign governments and foreign
donors.
Now, you all need to know out
there, this is basic stuff.
Foreign donors, and certainly
foreign governments, cannot
participate in the American
political process. They cannot
make financial contributions.
But the Clintons figured out a
way to create a foundation where
foreign governments and foreign
donors could donate millions of
dollars. And then we found,
thanks to the good work of the
Associated Press, that more than
half her private meetings
when she was secretary of state
were given to major donors of
the Clinton Foundation.
When you talk about all these --
all these baseless rumors about
Russia and the rest,
Hillary Clinton -- you asked the
trustworthy question at the very
beginning -- the reason...
QUIJANO: Governor, your
two minutes are up.
PENCE: ... the reason the
American people don't trust
Hillary Clinton is because they
are looking at the pay to play
politics that she operated with
the Clinton Foundation through
a private server...
QUIJANO: Governor, please.
PENCE: ... while she's
secretary of state.
QUIJANO: Your two minutes
are up, Governor.
PENCE: And they're
saying enough is enough.
QUIJANO: Senator Kaine?
KAINE: I'm going to talk about
the foundation, and then I'll
talk about North Korea. So,
on the foundation. I am glad to
talk about the foundation. The
Clinton Foundation is
one of the highest- rated
charities in the world. It
provides AIDS drugs to about
11.5
million people. It helps
Americans deal with opioid
overdoses. It gets higher
rankings
for its charity than the
American Red Cross does. The
Clinton foundation does an awful
lot of good work.
Hillary Clinton as secretary of
state took no action to benefit
the foundation. The State
Department did an investigation,
and they concluded that
everything Hillary Clinton
did as secretary of state was
completely in the interest of
the United States. So the
foundation does good work. And
Hillary Clinton as secretary of
state acted in the interests
of the United States.
But let's compare this now with
the Trump organization and the
Trump Foundation. The
Trump organization is an
octopus-like organization with
tentacles all over the world
whose conflict
of interests could only be known
if Donald Trump would release
his tax returns. He's
refused to do it.
His sons have said that the
organization has a lot of
business dealings in Russia. And
remember, the Trump organization
is not a non-profit. It's
putting money into Donald
Trump's pockets and into the
pockets of his children, whereas
the Clinton Foundation is
a non- profit and no Clinton
family member draws any salary.
PENCE: The Trump
Foundation is non-profit.
KAINE: In addition, Donald Trump
has a foundation. The foundation
was just fined for illegally
contributing foundation dollars
to a political campaign of a
Florida attorney general. They
made an illegal contribution,
and then they tried to hide it
by disguising it to somebody
else. And the person they
donated to was somebody whose
office was charged with
investigating
Trump University.
This is the difference between a
foundation that does good work
and a secretary of state
who acted in accordance with
American interest and somebody
who is conflicted and doing work
around the world and won't share
with the American public what
he's doing and what those
conflicts are.
QUIJANO: Governor, I will give
you 30 seconds to respond,
because I know you want to, but,
again, I would remind you both
this was about North Korea.
(LAUGHTER)
PENCE: Well, Thank you. Thank
you. The Trump Foundation is a
private family foundation.
They give virtually every cent
in the Trump Foundation to
charitable causes.
KAINE: Political contributions?
PENCE: Less than ten cents on
the dollar in the Clinton
Foundation has gone to
charitable
causes.
KAINE: A $20,000 portrait of
Donald Trump? PENCE: Less than
10 cents on the dollar of
the Clinton Foundation has
gone to charitable causes.
KAINE: Ninety percent.
PENCE: It has been a platform
for the Clintons to travel the
world, to have staff. But
honestly,
Senator, we would know a lot
more about it if Hillary Clinton
would just turn over the
33,000 e-mails...
QUIJANO: All right, let's
turn back to North Korea...
PENCE: ... that she refused to
turn over in her private
server...
QUIJANO: Senator Kaine...
PENCE: ... and we'd have a much
better picture of what the
Clinton Foundation was about.
QUIJANO: Senator Kaine, if you
had intelligence that North
Korea was about to launch a
missile,
a nuclear-armed missile capable
of reaching the United States,
would you take preemptive
action?
KAINE: If we -- look, a
president should take action to
defend the United States against
imminent threat. You have to. A
president has to do that. Now
exactly what action, you
would have to determine what
your intelligence was, how
certain you were of that
intelligence,
but you would have
to take action.
You asked the question about how
do we deal with a North Korea.
I'm on the Foreign Relations
Committee. We just did an
extensive sanctions package
against North Korea. And
interestingly
enough, Elaine, the U.N.
followed and did this --
virtually the same package.
Often
China will use their veto in the
Security Council to veto a
package like that. They're
starting to get worried about
North Korea, too. So they
actually supported the sanctions
package, even though many of the
sanctions are against Chinese
firms, Chinese financial
institutions.
So we're working together with
China, and we need to. China's
another one of those
relationships
where it's competitive, it's
also challenging, and in times
like North Korea, we have to
be able to cooperate. Hillary
understands that very well. She
went once famously to
China and stood up at a human
rights meeting and looked them
in the eye and said, "Women's
rights are human rights." They
didn't want her to say that, but
she did.
But she's also worked on a lot
of diplomatic and important
diplomatic deals with China.
And that's what
it's going to take.
The thing I would worry a little
bit about is that Donald Trump
owes about $650 million
to banks, including the Bank of
China. I'm not sure he could
stand up so tough to the
people who have
loaned him money.
QUIJANO: All right. I'd like to
turn to our next segment now.
And in this, I'd like to
focus on social issues. You have
both been open about the role
that faith has played
in your lives. Can you discuss
in detail a time when you
struggled to balance your
personal
faith and a public policy
position? Senator Kaine?
KAINE: Yeah, that's an easy one
for me, Elaine. It's an easy
one. I'm really fortunate. I
grew up in a wonderful household
with great Irish Catholic
parents. My mom and dad are
sitting right here. I was
educated by Jesuits at Rockhurst
High School in Kansas City. My
40th reunion is in 10 days.
And I worked with Jesuit
missionaries in Honduras, now
nearly 35 years ago, and they
were the
heroes of my life. I try to
practice my religion in a very
devout way and follow the
teachings
of my church in my own personal
life. But I don't believe in
this nation, a First Amendment
nation, where we don't raise any
religion over the other, and we
allow people to worship
as they please, that the
doctrines of any one religion
should be mandated for everyone.
For me, the hardest struggle in
my faith life was the Catholic
Church is against the death
penalty and so am I. But I was
governor of a state, and the
state law said that there
was a death penalty for crimes
if the jury determined them to
be heinous. And so I had
to grapple with that.
When I was running for governor,
I was attacked pretty strongly
because of my position on
the death penalty. But I looked
the voters of Virginia in the
eye and said, look, this
is my religion. I'm not going to
change my religious practice to
get one vote, but I
know how to take an oath and
uphold the law. And if you elect
me, I will uphold the law.
And I was elected, and I did. It
was very, very difficult to
allow executions to go forward,
but in circumstances where I
didn't feel like there was a
case for clemency, I told
Virginia
voters I would uphold
the law, and I did.
That was a real struggle. But I
think it is really, really
important that those of us
who have deep faith lives don't
feel that we could just
substitute our own views for
everybody else in society,
regardless of their views.
QUIJANO: Governor Pence?
PENCE: Well, it's a wonderful
question. And my Christian faith
is at the very heart of
who I am. I was also raised in a
wonderful family of faith. It
was a church on Sunday
morning and grace before dinner.
PENCE: But my Christian faith
became real for me when I made a
personal decision for
Christ when I was a freshman in
college. And I've tried to live
that out however imperfectly
every day of my life since. And
with my wife at my side, we've
followed a calling into
public service, where we've --
we've tried to -- we've tried to
keep faith with the values
that we cherish.
And with regard to when I
struggle, I appreciate, and --
and -- and -- I have a great
deal of
respect for Senator Kaine's
sincere faith. I truly do.
KAINE: That's shared.
PENCE: But for me, I would tell
you that for me the sanctity of
life proceeds out of the
belief that -- that ancient
principle that -- where God says
before you were formed in
the womb, I knew you, and so for
my first time in public life, I
sought to stand with
great compassion for
the sanctity of life.
The state of Indiana has also
sought to make sure that we
expand alternatives in health
care counseling for women,
non-abortion alternatives. I'm
also very pleased at the fact
we're well
on our way in Indiana to
becoming the most pro-adoption
state in America. I think if
you're going to be pro-life, you
should -- you should be pro-
adoption.
But what I can't understand is
with Hillary Clinton and now
Senator Kaine at her side
is to support a practice like
partial-birth abortion. I mean,
to hold to the view -- and
I know Senator Kaine, you hold
pro-life views personally -- but
the very idea that a child
that is almost born into the
world could still have their
life taken from them is just
anathema
to me.
And I cannot -- I can't
conscience about -- about a
party that supports that. Or
that -- I know
you've historically opposed
taxpayer funding of abortion.
But Hillary Clinton wants to
-- wants to repeal the
longstanding provision in the
law where we said we wouldn't
use taxpayer
dollars to fund abortion.
So for me, my faith informs my
life. I try and spend a little
time on my knees every
day. But it all for me begins
with cherishing the dignity, the
worth, the value of every
human life.
KAINE: Elaine, this is a
fundamental question, a
fundamental question. Hillary
and I are
both people out of religious
backgrounds, from Methodist
church experience, which was
really formative for her
as a public servant.
But we really feel like you
should live fully and with
enthusiasm the commands of your
faith.
But it is not the role of the
public servant to mandate that
for everybody else.
So let's talk about abortion and
choice. Let's talk about them.
We support Roe v. Wade. We
support the constitutional right
of American women to consult
their own conscience, their
own supportive partner, their
own minister, but then make
their own decision about
pregnancy.
That's something we trust
American women to do that.
And we don't think that women
should be punished, as Donald
Trump said they should, for
making
the decision to
have an abortion.
Governor Pence wants to repeal
Roe v. Wade. He said he wants to
put it on the ash heap
of history. And we have some
young people in the audience who
weren't even born when
Roe was decided. This is pretty
important. Before Roe v. Wade,
states could pass criminal
laws to do just that, to punish
women if they made the choice to
terminate a pregnancy.
I think you should live your
moral values. But the last
thing, the very last thing that
government should do is have
laws that would punish women who
make reproductive choices.
And that is the fundamental
difference between a
Clinton-Kaine ticket and a
Trump- Pence
ticket that wants to punish
women who make that choice.
PENCE: No, it's really not.
Donald Trump and I would never
support legislation that
punished
women who made the heartbreaking
choice to end a pregnancy.
KAINE: Then why did
Donald Trump say that?
PENCE: We just never would.
KAINE: Why did he say that?
PENCE: Well, look, it's -- look,
he's not a polished politician
like you and Hillary
Clinton. And so...
KAINE: Well, I would admit
that's not a polished...
(CROSSTALK)
PENCE: You know, things don't
always come out exactly the way
he means them.
KAINE: Well, can I say...
PENCE: But I'm telling you what
the policy of our administration
would be.
KAINE: Great line from the --
great line from the gospel of
Matthew. From the fullness of
the heart, the mouth speaks.
PENCE: Yeah. KAINE: When Donald
Trump says women should be
punished or Mexicans are rapists
and criminals...
PENCE: I'm telling you...
KAINE: ... or John McCain is not
a hero, he is showing you who he
is.
PENCE: Senator, you've whipped
out that Mexican thing again. He
-- look...
KAINE: Can you defend it?
PENCE: There are criminal aliens
in this country, Tim, who have
come into this country illegally
who are perpetrating violence
and taking American lives.
KAINE: You want to -- you want
to use a big broad brush against
Mexicans on that?
PENCE: He also said and many of
them are good people. You keep
leaving that out of your
quote. And if you want me
to go there, I'll go there.
But here's -- there is a choice,
and it is a choice on life. I
couldn't be more proud
to be standing with Donald
Trump, who's standing for the
right to life. It's a principle
that
-- Senator Kaine -- and I'm very
gentle about this, because I
really do respect you -- it's
a principle that you embrace.
And I have appreciated the fact
that you've supported the Hyde
amendment, which bans the
use of taxpayer funding for
abortion, in the past, but
that's not Hillary Clinton's
view.
People need to understand, we
can come together as a nation.
We can create a culture of life.
More and more young people today
are embracing life because we
know we are -- we're better
for it. We can -- like Mother
Teresa said at that famous
national prayer breakfast...
KAINE: This is important --
PENCE: ... bring the -- let's
welcome the children into our
world. There are so many
families around the country who
can't have children. We could
improve adoption...
KAINE: But, Governor...
PENCE: ... so that families that
can't have children can adopt
more readily those children
from crisis pregnancies.
KAINE: Governor, why don't you
trust women to make this choice
for themselves? We can
encourage people to support
life. Of course we can. But why
don't you trust women? Why
doesn't Donald Trump trust women
to make this choice for
themselves?
That's what we ought to be doing
in public life. Living our lives
of faith or motivation
with enthusiasm and excitement,
convincing other, dialoguing
with each other about important
moral issues of the day...
PENCE: Because there are...
KAINE: ... but on fundamental
issues of morality, we should
let women make their own
decisions.
PENCE: Because there is -- a
society can be judged by how it
deals with its most vulnerable,
the aged, the infirm, the
disabled, and the unborn. I
believe it with all my heart.
And
I couldn't be more proud to be
standing with a pro-life
candidate in Donald Trump.
QUIJANO: I do have one final
question for you both tonight.
It has been a divisive campaign.
Senator Kaine, if your ticket
wins, what specifically are you
going to do to unify the country
and
reassure the people who
voted against you?
KAINE: That's a really important
one. That may be the $64,000
question, because it has
been a divisive campaign. And
again, Hillary is running a
campaign about stronger
together,
and Donald Trump -- and this is
-- this is not directed at this
man, except to the extent
that he can't defend Donald
Trump -- Donald Trump has run a
campaign that's been about
one insult after the next.
But we do have to bring the
country together. So here's what
we'll do. Hillary Clinton was
first lady, then senator for
eight years and secretary of
state. And I served in the
Senate.
And I'm really amazed, Elaine,
as I talk to Republican
senators, how well they regard
and respect Hillary Clinton.
She was on the Armed Services
Committee. She was on other
committees. She worked across
the aisle when she was first
lady to get the CHIP program
passed so that 8 million
low-income
kids have health insurance in
this country, including 150,000
in Indiana.
She worked across the aisle
after 9/11 to get health
benefits for the first
responders
who bravely went into the towers
and into the Pentagon. She
worked to get benefits for
-- TRICARE benefits for National
Guard members, including
Hoosiers and Virginians in the
National
Guard.
She has a track record of
working across the aisle to make
things happen. And, you know,
Elaine, I have the same track
record. I was a governor of
Virginia with two Republican
houses. And in the Senate, I
have good working relationships
across the aisle.
Because I think it's fine to be
a Democrat or Republican or
independent, but after Election
Day, the goal is work together.
And Hillary Clinton has a track
record of accomplishment
across the aisle that will
enable her to do just that when
we work with the new Congress
in January.
QUIJANO: Governor, how will you
unify the country if you win?
PENCE: Well, thank you, Elaine,
and thanks for a great
discussion...
KAINE: Absolutely.
PENCE: ... tonight.
Thank you, Senator.
This is a very challenging time
in the life of our nation.
Weakened America's place in
the world after the leadership
of Hillary Clinton and Barack
Obama on the world stage
has been followed by an economy
that is truly struggling,
stifled by an avalanche of more
taxes, more regulation,
Obamacare, the war on coal, and
the kind of trade deals that
have put American workers in the
back seat. I think the best way
that we can bring people
together is through change
in Washington, D.C.
You know, I served in
Washington, D.C., for 12 years
in the Congress of the United
States.
And I served with many
Republicans and Democrats, men
and women of goodwill. The
potential is
there to really change the
direction of this country, but
it's going to take leadership
to do it.
The American people want to see
our nation standing tall on the
world stage again. They
want to see us supporting our
military, rebuilding our
military, commanding the respect
of the
world, and they want to see the
American economy off to the
races again. They want to see an
American comeback.
5-Minute Fix newsletter Keeping
up with politics is easy now.
Sign up And Donald Trump's
entire career has been
about building. It's been about
-- it's going through hardship
just like a businessperson
does and finding a way through
smarts and ingenuity and
resilience to fight forward
and -- when Donald Trump becomes
president of the United States,
we're going to have
a stronger America.
When you hear him say he wants
to make America great again,
when we do that, I truly do
believe
the American people are going to
be standing taller. They're
going to see that real change
can happen after decades of just
talking about it. And when that
happens, the American people
are going to stand tall, stand
together, and we'll have the
kind of unity that's been
missing
for way too long.
QUIJANO: All right,
gentlemen, thank you so much.
This concludes the vice
presidential debate. My thanks
to the candidates, the
commission,
and to you for watching. Please
tune in this Sunday for the
second presidential debate
at Washington University in St.
Louis and the final debate on
October 19th at the University
of Nevada, Las Vegas.
From Farmville, Virginia, I'm
Elaine Quijano of CBS News. Good
night.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that does
wrap up the vice presidential
debate between Tim Kaine and
Mike Pence.
Joining me here in our "PBS
NewsHour" studio for some
analysis are syndicated
columnist
Mark Shields, Amy Walter of The
Cook Political Report, and
Washington Post columnist
Michael
Gerson.
To all three of you, we're going
to continue to watch Mr. Pence,
Governor Pence, and Senator
Kaine on the stage as
they greet their family.
But, Mark Shields, this was a
debate with a lot of issue
questions. What did you think?
MARK SHIELDS: I thought that the
Republicans, in both weeks, if
there were sprints of 20
minutes did pretty well.
Unfortunately, they're 90-minute
marathons. Tim Kaine came out
captivated
and a little hyper.
As it went on, he got stronger,
more measured, and put --
dominated the debate in terms of
putting Mike Pence, whose tone
throughout, I thought, was
excellent, but put him on
defensive.
He said, "I don't believe you
will defend Donald Trump," and
then did the litany. Everything
he said about Donald Trump was
true. And Mike -- and he was
right. Mike Pence didn't defend
him. He made the best case he
could. I thought Pence made a
good affirmative case, he was
put on the defensive in trying
to defend Trump, which he
refused to do.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Amy Walter, did
you see Tim Kaine putting
Governor Pence on the defensive?
AMY WALTER: I think that we're
going to have to figure out, as
people start to digest this,
what folks are going to remember
more about this debate, whether
it was Kaine interrupting
to put him on the defensive,
which, if you just judged by
Twitter and people sort of
keying in, they found that a
little over the top, just too
much time interrupting, not
enough tough time kind of
talking about the issues in a
more measured way.
It is true, though, that while
Kaine definitely threw all of
Trump's past statements at
Pence,
he found a way to duck and dodge
and try to get the conversation
back to Hillary Clinton,
back to the issues he
wanted to talk about.
Are voters going to, as Mark
said, see that and go, look, he
didn't actually address those
specific issues, or will they
remember it more for the fact
that we didn't hear Mike
Pence go sort of down a rabbit
hole in the same way that Donald
Trump did in the last
debate, where he just defended
over-the-top statements and then
got himself in bigger
trouble?
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do you
see it, Michael Gerson?
MICHAEL GERSON: I think that
Senator Kaine often got the best
of the arguments. He had
this rat-a-tat delivery like a
prepared prosecutor. And he had
a lot of material to work with,
to be honest, I think, with
Trump's past statements.
Everyone that loves Tim Kaine
who knows him, I'm not sure that
was on display tonight here
in the debate. He was sometimes
not very appealing, particularly
in the first half of the debate,
where I think he interrupted.
So, I would think, by points,
you do Kaine, and, then by
style, it was often Pence.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You're saying
that you thought Kaine did --
was too much on the attack, too
much trying to pin
down Mike Pence?
MICHAEL GERSON: Yes, I think
caffeinated was maybe too kind
in this case. He often -- he
sometimes seemed rude. And that
I think in a debate can come
across poorly. So, yes,
but he did he get
better over time.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right.
Our Lisa Desjardins -- as we
continue to watch the candidates
there on the stage at Longwood
University, our Lisa Desjardins
is somewhere behind the stage or
nearby, where she has
been watching the debate.
Lisa, so, tell us what you're
seeing and hearing there.
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right,
nearby the stage and through the
next building.
This is the spin room, where we
hear from the campaigns
immediately after debates.
And I was fortunate that, a few
feet away from me, who came
through the curtain but
Kellyanne Conway, the campaign
manager for Donald Trump. I was
the first to speak with
her. And I don't think she had
spoken to many reporters at this
point.
Here is what the Trump campaign
told me, what Kellyanne Conway
said. She said, this was
vintage Pence. She felt he
knocked it out of the park, that
he was particularly commanding
on policy.
And here's especially what she
said, folks. She said she felt
he was polite and was never
rude, and she feels that Tim
Kaine will regret the number of
times he interrupted tonight.
On the other hand, standing
behind me, see this giant scrum
of reporters and microphones.
They're all in that pile of
people talking to Robby Mook
with the Clinton campaign. And
I can hear, standing -- I'm
close enough to hear what he is
saying.
He's stressing other things.
He's staying that he felt that
Tim Kaine had a strong night
on a couple of areas, one of
them being talking about women,
talking about their appeal to
women, and also talking about
Donald Trump's history of verbal
attacks, as they're calling
it, on women and on immigrants.
So, you have two very different
takes on this debate tonight.
Not hearing about interruptions
from the Kaine camp, but that
seems like something the Trump
folks are going to stress,
probably
not just tonight.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, Lisa,
and we may well be coming back
to you a little bit later
as you get a chance to talk to
some of the other
representatives of the two
campaigns
there.
LISA DESJARDINS: Great.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I think we want
to go up to our newsroom right
now. Is that right?
Our John Yang has also been
listening very closely to the
debate with our team. He's
been talking -- working with our
team fact-checking what was said
tonight.
John, what did you discover?
JOHN YANG: Well, Judy, we found
couple of instances when each of
the candidates had
a little trouble with the facts.
In the one hand, it was the --
Tim Kaine, when he was praising
the top of his ticket,
Hillary Clinton, he gave her
credit for tough negotiation to
eliminate the Iranian nuclear
weapons program.
In fact, that agreement came
two-and-a-half years after
Secretary Clinton left the
administration,
and that the -- the agreement
itself slows the nuclear weapon
program in Iran, doesn't
eliminate it.
And Mike Pence also got into a
little trouble when he was
talking about the top of his
ticket,
Donald Trump, but it came in
defending Mr. Trump when --
against the allegation -- or
Tim Kaine saying that Trump had
said that more -- more nations
should get nuclear weapons.
Pence came back, "He never said
that, Senator, and you know it."
In fact, in March, Trump told
The New York Times that it may
not be such a bad thing
for the United States if Japan,
South Korea and Saudi Arabia had
nuclear weapons.
So, in each instance, the top of
the ticket got the number two on
the ticket into a little
trouble, in one case praising
and in one case defending --
Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thank you, John.
And we know there was a lot
thrown around in the debate
tonight. There were a lot of
issues that they covered. But
before we get to any more of
that, Mark, I want to come
back to you on the point --
points that Amy and Michael were
making a minute ago, about
where Tim Kaine may have won on
points, but, when it comes to
presentation, to demeanor,
maybe he didn't.
How do you see that?
MARK SHIELDS: No, I thought --
as I said, I used the word
caffeinated. I thought he
was quick.
He had canned lines, prepared
lines, like "You're hired
president, you're fired
president."
He appeared, to use a word,
overprepared. I mean, there's no
doubt about it.
But I think, as it went on,
there was no question he was
prosecuting in a more affable
sense,
but he was making the case. When
he said that Governor Pence had
to give Donald Trump his
tax returns in order to be
chosen as vice president...
MICHAEL GERSON: That
was a good point.
MARK SHIELDS: ... it
was a superb point.
And then Pence, you know, he
would say, "I don't think
Senator Pence will defend --
Governor
Pence will defend this."
And he was right.
Pence didn't spend his time
going down a rabbit hole, as Amy
put it, or defending Donald
Trump.
And I guess, when Mike Pence
said, Donald Trump used the tax
code just the way it's
supposed to be used,
brilliantly, boy, oh, boy, I
have to be very frank. Show us
the
tax returns. I mean, if it was
-- how brilliant was it, if you
want to do it.
And the point that was made that
I think will come out of this
debate is the narrative.
I think the Clinton campaign has
mishandled Trump's taxes. And it
should be that, he says
he's smart. And Tim Kaine made
the point that that means that
the people who pay the taxes,
whether they're firefighters or
emergency room nurses or E-5s in
the Marine Corps, they're
dumb. The people who pay for
special education teachers or
pay for cops and firefighters,
they're dumb.
And I think that's -- that's the
way to separate Donald Trump
from his constituency. And I
thought that was well done.
But there's question, he was
yippy and yappy, like a little
puppy, at the outset.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Amy Walter, on
this tax point, did -- was Tim
Kaine right to bring it up
again and again and again? Or
are we just tired of hearing
about it?
AMY WALTER: No, Tim Kaine's
job was pretty simple.
It was to remind the viewers at
every moment things that Trump
has said and done that are
very difficult to defend. And,
as we discussed, Pence had a
very difficult time and
sometimes
completely avoided
answering those questions.
Mike Pence's job wasn't only to
deflect those, but then to try
to bring it back. He sounded
like trying to shoehorn in the
e-mail server in an unrelated
question. Oh, I got to make
sure to get that in. Make sure
got the Clinton Foundation. Make
sure you shoehorn that in.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
AMY WALTER: But what Pence also
did through -- at the very
beginning -- he tried to do
it again at the end and tried to
get it in there at other points
-- this is about strength,
this is about putting America
back on track, right, this
message of change, things aren't
going well. If you want
continuity of the bad things
that are happening now, then go
ahead and vote for Hillary
Clinton. If you want to go
change and you want strength,
come
with us.
But that was hard to do when it
was a constant barrage of Trump
statements that he had to
defend against.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But isn't that
what -- I mean, to play devil's
advocate here, Michael, isn't
that what the Clinton campaign
needs to do, I mean, to keep
reminding people of what Donald
Trump has said?
MICHAEL GERSON: Yes.
And, on a number of issues, I
think it worked. Governor Pence
had a habit of saying reassuring
things about -- that he clearly
believes on Russia or Syria or a
lot of other topics.
It's not clear that Donald Trump
would believe those things.
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
MICHAEL GERSON: I mean, he
essentially had to -- often had
to defend Donald Trump by
having a different Donald Trump,
by essentially saying that this
is not the man you see.
But you can go to the record.
And that -- and, ultimately, he
could not defend on those issues
having to do with civility and
cruelty and the treatment of
women and all of these issues
that Kaine came back to again
and again. There is no response.
There can't be a response.
He has not apologized for those
things. And so you can't
respond.
(CROSSTALK)
AMY WALTER: Well, he
tried to deflect it.
MICHAEL GERSON: To
change the topic.
AMY WALTER: Well, you're running
an insult-driven campaign.
MICHAEL GERSON: Yes.
AMY WALTER: You're the
insult-driven campaign. And that
was his only...
MICHAEL GERSON: And then pivot.
AMY WALTER: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, at one
point, he simply said nothing,
and just -- it just went back
to the questioner.
MARK SHIELDS: After the litany
he went through, and he didn't
say anything, and the -- that
was the one point where I wanted
the moderator to insert herself
and say, do you have an
answer for that? But...
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, we
have got Lisa Desjardins. We are
going to go back to Farmville,
Virginia, to
Longwood University.
Lisa, you have been talking to
some more campaign
representatives?
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
And I think, Judy, this theme of
a real flip in the execution of
tone is what we see happening.
I just spoke with Virginia
Senator Mark Warner. Of course,
he used to be the governor of
this
fine state. And when he was
governor, his lieutenant
governor was Tim Kaine.
Few people know Tim Kaine
better. And I asked Governor
Warner. I said, what about this
accusation
that Tim Kaine interrupted too
often, that perhaps he was rude?
Mark Warner said: If
anything, I would never imagine
calling Tim Kaine rude. Perhaps
there was some back and
forth.
And I said, no, I counted
interruptions. And he did
interrupt frequently. Governor
Pence
did as well.
And he said: No, I think -- this
is from the Democratic viewpoint
-- they say, what Governor
Kaine -- what Senator Kaine was
trying to do was to get Governor
Pence to answer for
the Trump campaign.
And I think we're going to have
Democrats say that the
Pence-Trump campaign didn't
answer
the accusations made tonight.
On the other hand, I talked to
Alabama Republican Senator Jeff
Sessions, who says they felt
that the tone from Governor
Pence showed he is a
higher-level player than we saw
from
the Clinton campaign tonight and
from Senator Kaine. But,
moreover, he was talking about
depth of policy from
Governor Pence.
We did see some serious policy
discussions tonight. And it's
interesting that we hear
the Trump campaign in particular
pointing that out and feeling
that they made some inroads
there. Obviously, that's for
viewers to decide, but it's
something that the Trump
campaign
is crowing about right now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, Lisa
talking to representatives of
the campaigns there at
the debate site at
Longwood University.
Amy, this is the point in the
discussion when we get to, OK,
how much difference is all
this...
(CROSSTALK)
AMY WALTER: Going
to make, right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: ... going to make
in the course, the trajectory of
this campaign, whatever
these two gentlemen did?
(CROSSTALK)
AMY WALTER: Right.
Well, we have spent a whole lot
of time talking about tone and
interrupting. And we have to
also recognize that, for most
Americans, what they're going to
see of this debate is going
to come in 30-second clips that
the morning shows are going to
show or other programs
like you will show
tomorrow night.
And so, if it is, as Mark
pointed out, the rat-a-tat-tat
of the, you said this, you said
this -- you know, or Donald
Trump said this, this, this,
this, this, the Mount Rushmore
-- he supports the Mount
Rushmore of these terrible
people, like Putin and Kim
Jong-un,
well, then that's a victory for
the Clinton campaign, despite
the fact that, for people
who watched it for 90 minutes,
it didn't feel -- it felt very
different from that.
So, that is going to really be a
true test about whether this
mattered, or whether Mike
Pence and the Trump campaign can
make the case that Pence was the
measured one, Kaine
was the one that was sort of
spiraling out of control, Pence
was the one who can handle
being under fire.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Michael Gerson,
how do you see this question of
how much -- do you see
the campaign taking a different
course as a result of how well
either Tim Kaine or Mike
Pence did tonight?
MICHAEL GERSON: Well, as I said
earlier, Republicans were
looking for some kind of morale
boost.
And they may have
gotten some tonight.
I mean, Mike Pence was calm. He
made the best defense that he
could pushed back hard in
certain areas. And I -- so,
Republicans are going to take
some hope from that, given the
week, the horrible week that
they have had, OK, miserable
week they have had.
Republicans -- Democrats will
take some hope from the fact
that this case was prosecuted
again and again and again, and
there wasn't an adequate
response on a number of issues.
So, I'm not sure how much
difference that makes. But I
think both parties will probably
find some way to praise
this performance.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Republicans
take some heart, Mark?
MARK SHIELDS: Sure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Democrats are
pleased that Tim Kaine
prosecuted the case?
MARK SHIELDS: Republicans will
say that Mike Pence, and
legitimately so, was
unflappable,
that he in no way -- they
started -- used the similar
strategy that Hillary Clinton
did last week to get under his
skin. They didn't get under Mike
Pence's skin.
But the problem is that some
Republican will say, gee, if
only the ticket were reversed.
And that will not sit well with
the top of the ticket. If that
is said anywhere, and
attributed to any Republican,
that, gee, Pence did much better
job than Trump, it will not
please the presidential nominee
on the Republican side.
AMY WALTER: And, of course...
MARK SHIELDS: Just the only
other thing was, there was a
little hyperbole, I thought, on
the part of Kaine. He was a
little bit too fawning,
appreciative of Hillary Clinton.
I mean, there was sort of a
portrait of Hillary Clinton that
he gave, as the appreciative
running mate, that I thought was
excessive at times, it seemed.
MICHAEL GERSON: And perhaps
defending the status quo on the
economy is not necessarily
the best strategy.
There could have been more
empathy with the concerns that a
significant portion of the
American public felt. It sounded
like a defense of Barack Obama
sometimes, not just a defense
of Hillary Clinton. And that's
really not the purpose here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But it's
interesting, Mark. You say he
was too effusive in his praise
of Hillary Clinton.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mike Pence was
sitting there saying: I'm very
proud to serve with Donald
Trump.
MARK SHIELDS: That's right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: He ticked
off all the reasons why.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I'm just
wondering how you strike a
balance, and you are not that
excited
about your running mate.
MARK SHIELDS: I just -- I felt
that there was a canned -- it
was almost like Clinton
people had prepared Tim Kaine,
and that these are the points
you want to make about how
wonderful the nominee is.
I felt that early. And, as I
say, when he got his footing, I
just thought there was
no question, over the last
two-thirds of the debate, who
was the alpha male in the room,
to put it bluntly.
I mean, he was dominant. And
Mike Pence, who was cool and
calm, was reacting and playing
defense. And you can't
score on defense in these.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Sometimes, Amy --
only got a couple of minutes
left -- but people spend
time after these debates saying,
well, were they targeting their
base or were they trying
to expand the base?
AMY WALTER: Right. Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How
did you see that?
AMY WALTER: I think vice
presidential debates are always
base-organize debates.
First of all, those are the
people who are watching these
debates. They're not as -- they
don't bring in as many new
voters or new viewers. So,
that's what this was about. And
I agree
completely with Michael that it
is about reassuring and
energizing the people that you
need to
get to turn out to vote.
But all of this, of course, will
be soon forgotten, and -- when
we come back here on Sunday, and
the two main contenders shape up
against each other. And so this
is probably very short-lived
bounce, whatever it is,
for either campaign.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, quick
takeaway, Michael?
MICHAEL GERSON: One thing that
was different from the
presidential debate was the talk
about faith and the way
it influenced policy.
(CROSSTALK)
MICHAEL GERSON: And this showed
diversity of the Roman Catholic
Church. Lets you know
how broad this is. Went all the
way from a social justice
Catholicism that was very
pro-choice
in certain ways, all the way to
Pence's kind of evangelical
Catholicism that talked about
pro-life issues.
And they both made their case.
And that -- but that was a
deepening of an argument.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Two men who
grew up in the Catholic faith.
MARK SHIELDS: Two men who
grew up -- that's right.
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Very
quick final...
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: That's right.
The point is that these were
supposed to be the nice guys.
AMY WALTER: Yes. That's right.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: It was pretty much
of a Pier 6 brawl for two nice
guys.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Who were brought
up as -- I think they were both
altar boys. Is that right
?
MARK SHIELDS: Was Mike
Pence an altar boy?
JUDY WOODRUFF: I'm not sure.
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: He went away to
college and lost his faith
and...
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: I don't
know what happened.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mark Shields,
Michael Gerson, and Amy Walter.
And that wraps up our coverage
of this vice presidential
debate, but there's whole lot
more online, where you can watch
highlights. That's at
PBS.org/NewsHour.
Plus, our politics team of Lisa
Desjardins and Dan Bush will be
taking your questions
live on Facebook. That's in a
few minutes. And that's at
Facebook.com/NewsHour.
I'm Judy Woodruff. Thank
you for joining us.
And we want you to join us right
here for the "NewsHour" tomorrow
evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," we thank you, and
good night.